The Project Gutenberg eBook of Contemplation
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Reflection

Author: Franz Kafka

Release date: November 18, 2007 [eBook #23532]

Language: German

Credits: Produced by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVIEW ***




Produced by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                   FRANZ KAFKA

                   CONTEMPLATION




                    MDCCCCXIII

               ERNST ROWOHLT PUBLISHING HOUSE

                     LEIPZIG




        This book was published in 800 numbered
        copies in November 1912 from the
        Printed by Offizin Poeschel & Trepte
        No.


 Copyright 1912 by Ernst Rowohlt Verlag, Leipzig




                    For M. B.




CONTENTS


Children on the country road 1

Unmasking a con artist 17

The Sudden Walk 27

Resolutions 32

The trip to the mountains 36

The Bachelor's Misfortune 39

The Merchant 42

Distracted Looking Out 51

The Way Home 53

The Passers-by 56

Passenger 59

Dresses 63

The rejection 66

Food for thought for gentlemen riders 70

The Alley Window 75

Desire to become an Indian 77

The Trees 79

Unhappiness 80




Children on the country road


I heard the cars driving past the garden gate, sometimes I saw
They also saw through the faintly moving gaps in the leaves. How the
hot summer the wood in their spokes and shafts! Workers came
from the fields and laughed so much that it was a disgrace.

I was sitting on our little swing, I was just resting between
the trees in my parents' garden.

It didn't stop at the gate. Children running were in the
Moment over; grain wagons with men and women on the sheaves
and all around the flowerbeds darkened; towards evening I saw a
A gentleman walking slowly with a stick and a few girls who are
in arm's length, stepped into the grass to the side and greeted him.

Then birds flew up as if sparkling, I followed them with my eyes,
saw them rise in one breath until I no longer believed that
they climbed, but that I fall, and holding tightly to the ropes
I started to rock a little out of weakness. Soon I rocked more strongly,
when the air was already cooler and instead of the flying birds, trembling
Stars appeared.

I had my evening meal by candlelight. I often had both arms
the wooden board and, already tired, I bit into my sandwich.
openwork curtains billowed in the warm wind, and sometimes
someone passing by outside held her with his hands when
he wanted to see me better and talk to me. Most of the time the
Candle soon and in the dark candle smoke there were still a
For a while the mosquitoes gathered around. One of them asked me from the window
out, I looked at him as if I were looking into the mountains or into the bare
Air, and he wasn't particularly interested in an answer either.

Then one of them jumped over the window sill and reported that the others
were already in front of the house, so I stood up with a sigh.

"No, why are you sighing like that? What happened? Is it a
special, never-to-be-repaired misfortune? Will we never
recover? Is everything really lost?'

Nothing was lost. We ran outside the house. "Thank God, there you are
You finally!« -- »You're always late!« -- »Why me?«
-- »You in particular, stay at home if you don't want to come.« -- »No
Mercy!' -- 'What? No mercy? How are you talking?'

We pierced the evening with our heads. There was no daytime or
Nighttime. Soon our vest buttons were rubbing against each other like teeth,
soon we were running at a constant distance, fire in our mouths, like animals
in the tropics. Like cuirassiers in old wars, stamping and high in
the air, we drove each other down the short alley and with this
With a run-up in their legs, they continued up the country road. Some stepped into
the ditch, they barely disappeared in front of the dark embankment,
they were already standing like strangers on the field path and looked
down.

»Come down!« -- »Come up first!« -- »So that you can
throw it down, it doesn't occur to us, we're still that clever." -- "So
You're a coward, you mean to say. Come on, come on!' -- 'Really? You?
You, of all people, are going to throw us down? What would you look like?'

We made the attack, were pushed in the chest and lay down
into the grass of the ditch, falling voluntarily. Everything was
evenly warmed, we felt neither warmth nor cold in the grass, only
one became tired.

If you turned on your right side and put your hand under your ear,
one would like to fall asleep. Although one wanted to pull oneself together again
with your chin held high, but fall into a deeper ditch. Then
If you wanted to, with your arm held across, your legs bent,
throw the air and again into an even deeper ditch
fall. And they didn't want to stop.

How to properly prepare yourself for sleeping in the last ditch
stretching, especially in the knees, was hardly thought of and
He lay on his back, ready to cry, as if he were sick. One blinked when
once a boy, his elbows at his hips, with dark soles over
us jumped from the embankment onto the road.

The moon was already visible at some height, a mail coach drove in its
Light passed. A gentle wind arose generally, even in the ditch
you could feel it, and the forest nearby began to rustle. There lay
you don't care so much about being alone anymore.

»Where are you?« -- »Come here!« -- »All together!« -- »What are you hiding
You, stop this nonsense!« -- »Don't you know that the post has already passed
is?« -- »But no! Already over?« -- »Of course, while you were sleeping
you, she drove past." -- "I was sleeping? No way!"
-- "Just keep quiet, it's obvious." -- "But I beg you." --
"Comes!"

We walked closer together, some held hands, the
You couldn't keep your head high enough because it was going downhill.
shouted an Indian war cry, we got kicks in the legs
a gallop like never before, at the jumps the horse lifted us in the hips
Wind. Nothing could have stopped us; we were so on the move that we
Even when overtaking, fold your arms and look around calmly
could.

We stopped on the torrent bridge; those who had continued walking,
returned. The water below beat against stones and roots as if
It was not already late in the evening. There was no reason why one
jumped onto the railing of the bridge.

A train pulled out from behind bushes in the distance, all
Coupées were illuminated, the glass windows safely lowered. One
of us started to sing a popular song, but we all wanted
We sang much faster than the train went, we rocked the
Poor, because the voice was not enough, we came with our voices in
a crowd we felt comfortable in. If you want to make your voice heard among other
mixes, you are caught like with a fishhook.

So we sang, with the forest behind us, into the ears of the distant travelers.
The adults were still awake in the village, the mothers were making the beds
for the night.

It was already time. I kissed the one who stood next to me, handed the three
Next just so the hands, began to run back the way, no one called
me. At the first intersection, where they could no longer see me,
I turned and walked along field paths back into the forest. I headed for the
City in the south, of which it was said in our village:

"There are people there! Imagine, they're not sleeping!"

"And why not?"

"Because they don't get tired."

"And why not?"

"Because they are fools."

"Don't fools get tired?"

"How could fools grow weary!"




Unmasking a con artist


Finally, around 10 o'clock in the evening, I arrived with a
a man I knew only vaguely, who this time suddenly
and wandered around the alleys for two hours
had, in front of the stately home, into which I had been
Society was invited.

"So!" I said and clapped my hands as a sign of unconditional
Necessity of farewell. I had already made less definite attempts
made some. I was already quite tired.

"Are you going upstairs right away?" he asked. I heard a
Sound like teeth chattering together.

"Yes."

I was invited, I told him right away. But I was
invited to come up where I would have loved to be, and
not to stand down here in front of the gate and to the ears of my counterpart
to look past. And now to become silent with him, as if we were
decided to stay on this spot for a long time.
The houses around it share in this silence, and the
Darkness above them, up to the stars. And the footsteps of invisible
Walkers whose paths one did not feel like guessing, the wind, the
repeatedly pressed himself to the opposite side of the street, a
Gramophone that is against the closed windows of some room
sang, -- they let themselves be heard from this silence, as if it were their
Property since time immemorial and forever.

And my companion submitted in his and -- after a smile --
also in my name, stretched along the wall his right arm
upwards and leaned his face against him, closing his eyes.

But I didn’t see this smile all the way through, because shame turned
me around suddenly. Only with that smile did I realize that
that was a con artist, nothing more. And I had been
long in this city, had believed that these con artists were through and through
to know how they emerge from side streets at night, hands outstretched,
how innkeepers approach us, how they look after the notice board,
where we stand, like playing hide and seek and behind the
column curves, at least with one eye, as they are in
Crossroads, when we become anxious, suddenly float in front of us
on the edge of our sidewalk! I understood them so well, they were
Yes, my first urban acquaintances were in the small inns,
and I owed them the first glimpse of an intransigence that
I could now imagine myself so little away from the earth that I had already
began to feel inside me. How did they still face one, even
when you had already escaped from them, when there was nothing
There was more to catch! How they didn't sit down, how they didn't fall
but looked at you with eyes that were still, even if only
from afar, convinced! And their means were always the same:
They stood in front of us as wide as they could; they looked for us
from where we were going; we prepared a substitute
dwelling in her own breast, and finally reared up the collected
feeling in us, they took it as an embrace into which they threw themselves,
face first.

And this time I only had these old jokes after so long together
I rubbed my fingertips together to remove the shame
to undo.

My husband, however, still leaned here as before, still considered himself
a con man, and the satisfaction with his fate blushed
his free cheek.

"Recognized!" I said, patting him lightly on the shoulder.
Then I hurried up the stairs and the so unjustifiably loyal faces
the servants upstairs in the anteroom made me happy like a beautiful
Surprise. I looked at them all one after the other while they
took off his coat and dusted his boots. Breathing a sigh of relief and stretching
I then entered the hall.




The sudden walk


If in the evening you seem to have finally decided to
to stay at home, put on the housecoat, after the evening meal at the
illuminated tables and do that work or that game
after which one usually goes to sleep, if
outside is an unfriendly weather, which makes staying at home
of course, if you have been at the table for so long
kept quiet, so that leaving caused general astonishment
would have to, if now the staircase is already dark and the front door
is blocked, and if despite all this you are suddenly
Discomfort gets up, changes his skirt, immediately dressed for the street
appears to have to leave, declares that he has to leave, and after a short farewell he does so,
Depending on the speed with which you slam the apartment door, more
or thinks you will cause less trouble if you are on the street
with limbs that already have this unexpected freedom, the
they have been given with particular agility when
through this one decision one has all the ability to decide
feels collected when one is dealing with greater than usual importance
realizes that one has more strength than need to find the fastest
Change is easy to effect and endure, and if one does so the
long alleys, -- then you are completely out of the mood for this evening
his family, which is turning into the insubstantial, while one
itself, very firm, black with outline, behind the thighs
striking, rising to his true form.

Everything is amplified when you have a
friend to see how he is doing.




Decisions


To rise from a miserable state must be achieved even with deliberate
Energy light. I tear myself away from the chair, walk around the table,
make head and neck flexible, bring fire to the eyes, tense the
Muscles around her. Work against every feeling, greet A.
stormy, if he will come now, tolerate B. kindly in my
Room, take everything that is said to C., despite pain and effort
long puffs into me.

But even if it works that way, with every inevitable mistake
can, the whole, the easy and the difficult, come to a standstill, and I will
have to go back in circles.

Therefore, the best advice remains to accept everything as a heavy mass
behave and feel yourself blown away, no unnecessary
Step to be lured away, look at the other with animal eyes, no
Feeling remorse, in short, what is left of life as a ghost, with
own hand, i.e., the last grave-like rest
multiply and allow nothing to exist except it.

A characteristic movement of such a state is the
Move your little finger over your eyebrows.




The trip to the mountains


"I don't know," I cried without a sound, "I don't know. If
If no one comes, then no one comes. I don't mean anything bad to anyone.
done, no one has done anything bad to me, but no one wants to help me.
Absolutely no one. But that's not how it is. It's just that no one is helping me—
Otherwise nobody would be pretty. I would really like to -- why
not -- take a trip with a group of nobody.
Of course, to the mountains, where else? How this nobody
pushing together, these many arms stretched out and hooked together,
these many feet, separated by tiny steps! Of course,
everyone is in tails. We're walking so-so, the wind blows through the gaps,
which we and our limbs leave open. The necks are stretched in the mountains
Free! It's a miracle we don't sing."




The Bachelor's Misfortune


It seems so bad to remain a bachelor, as an old man under
difficult to maintain dignity to ask for admission when one has an evening
wants to spend time with people, to be sick and to be out of the corner of his
Bettes to look at the empty room for weeks, always in front of the front door
To say goodbye, never to climb the stairs next to his wife
to push up to have only side doors in his room, which in
strange homes, carrying his evening meal home in one hand
to have to stare at strange children and not constantly
to repeat: "I have none", to look and behave
to train one or two bachelors of youthful memories.

That is how it will be, only that in reality today and later
himself will stand there, with a body and a real head, so
also a forehead to hit with the hand.




The Merchant


It is possible that some people feel sorry for me, but I feel
none of this. My small business fills me with worries that
pain inside my forehead and temples, but without giving me satisfaction in
to offer prospects, because my business is small.

I have to make arrangements for hours in advance, the memory of the
Keep the house servant awake, warn against feared mistakes and in a
season the fashions of the following calculate, not as they are among people
my circle, but in inaccessible
rural populations.

My money belongs to strangers; their circumstances cannot
be clear; I have no idea of ​​the misfortune that could befall them; how
I could fend it off! Perhaps they have become wasteful
and hold a party in a pub garden and others consider themselves
for a while on the run to America at this festival.

If the shop is closed on the evening of a working day and I
suddenly see hours in front of me in which I have to be there for the uninterrupted
needs of my business nothing will be able to work, then throws
My excitement, which I had sent far in advance in the morning, settled in me like a
returning flood, but it cannot stand in me and without a goal tears
she took me with her.

And yet I cannot use this mood at all and can only
Go home because my face and hands are dirty and sweaty,
the dress stained and dusty, the business cap on the head and
Boots scratched by crate nails. I walk as if on waves, clattering
with the fingers of both hands and children coming towards me, I drive
over the hair.

But the way is too short. I am soon in my house, opening the
Elevator door and enter.

I see that I am now and suddenly alone. Others who are
Having to climb stairs, getting a little tired, having to hurry
breathing lungs until someone opens the door of the apartment, have
a reason for anger and impatience, now come into the anteroom, where
she hangs up her hat, and only when she passes through the corridor at some
When they pass through the glass doors into their own room, they are alone.

But I am soon alone in the elevator and, leaning on my knees, I look
into the narrow mirror. As the elevator begins to rise, I say:

»Be quiet, step back, if you want to be in the shade of the trees, behind
the draperies of the windows, into the vaulted arches?'

I talk with my teeth and the banisters slide on the
Frosted glass panes down like falling water.

"Fly away; your wings, which I have never seen, may carry you to
village valley or to Paris, if that's where you feel like going.

But enjoy the view from the window when the processions from
all three streets, do not avoid each other, go through each other
and between their last rows the free space will be created again
Wave your handkerchiefs, be horrified, be moved, praise the
beautiful lady driving by.

Cross the stream on the wooden bridge, nod to the bathing children
and marvels at the cheers of the thousand sailors on the distant
Ironclad.

Just follow the inconspicuous man and when you see him in a gateway
rob him and then watch him, each with his hands in his
Bags, as he sadly makes his way down the left alley.

The police, scattered on their horses, galloping, tame the animals
and push back. Let them, the empty streets will
make them unhappy, I know it. They are already riding, I beg, in pairs
away, slowly around the street corners, flying over the squares."

Then I have to get out, go down the elevator, ring the doorbell
ring the bell and the girl opens the door while I greet her.




Distracted gaze


What will we do in these spring days that are now rapidly approaching?
This morning the sky was grey, but if you go to the window now, it is
you are surprised and lean your cheek against the window handle.

Below you can see the light of the already setting sun on the
Face of the childlike girl who walks and looks around, and
At the same time you can see the shadow of the man behind him
comes faster.

Then the man has already passed by and the child’s face is
very bright.




The way home


Look at the persuasiveness of the air after a thunderstorm! My
Merits appear to me and overwhelm me, even if I
not resist.

I march and my pace is the pace of this side of the street, this
Alley, this district. I am rightfully responsible for all
Knocks against doors, on the table tops, for all toasts,
for the lovers in their beds, in the scaffolding of the new buildings, in
dark alleys pressed against the walls of the houses, on the ottomans of the
Brothels.

I value my past against my future, but find both
excellent, neither can give preference and only the
I must rebuke the injustice of Providence, which has so favored me.

Only when I enter my room am I a little thoughtful, but
without me having to think about anything while climbing the stairs
It doesn't help me much that I completely
open and that the music is still playing in a garden.




The passersby


If you walk through an alley at night and a man,
visible from afar -- because the alley in front of us rises and it is
full moon -- runs towards us, we will not tackle it, even
when he is weak and ragged, even if someone is walking behind him
and screams, but we will let him continue running.

Because it is night, and we cannot help the alley in the
Full moon rises before us, and moreover, perhaps these two
who organizes the agitation for their entertainment, perhaps both are pursuing
a third, perhaps the first will be innocently prosecuted, perhaps
the second one wants to murder, and we would be accomplices to the murder,
Maybe the two don’t know anything about each other, and it’s just that everyone
on his own responsibility into his bed, perhaps they are sleepwalkers,
maybe the first one has weapons.

And finally, we must not be tired, we do not have so much wine
drunk? We're glad we won't see the second one either.




The passenger


I stand on the platform of the electric car and am completely
uncertain about my position in this world, in this city,
in my family. I could not even casually mention which
Claims I could justifiably make in any direction. I
I cannot defend myself from standing on this platform,
holding on to this loop, letting this cart carry me, so that people
avoid the car or walk quietly or rest in front of the shop windows. --
Nobody is asking me to do it, but that doesn't matter.

The car approaches a stop, a girl stands near
the steps, ready to get out. It seems so clear to me, as if
I had touched her. She is dressed in black, the folds of her skirt
hardly move, the blouse is tight and has a collar made of
white small-meshed lace, the left hand holds it flat against the wall,
The umbrella in her right hand is on the second highest step. Her
Face is brown, the nose, slightly pressed on the sides, closes
round and broad. She has a lot of brown hair and windblown hairs on her
right temple. Her small ear is close, but I can see that I
close, the whole back of the right ear and the shadow on
the root.

I asked myself at that time: Why is it that she cannot
is surprised that she keeps her mouth closed and does nothing like that
says?




Dresses


Often when I see dresses with multiple folds, ruffles and hangings,
that lie beautifully over beautiful bodies, then I think that they are not
remain so for a long time, but get wrinkles, no longer straight
smooth, get dust, which, thick in the decoration, can no longer be
is removed, and that no one becomes so sad and ridiculous
want to put on the same precious dress every day early and
to move out in the evening.

But I see girls who are beautiful and have many charming
Muscles and bones and taut skin and masses of thin hair
show, and yet every day in this one natural mask suit
appear, always place the same face in the same palms
and reflected by their mirror.

Only sometimes in the evening, when they come back late from a party, it seems
worn out, puffy, dusty, seen by everyone in the mirror
and hardly wearable anymore.




The rejection


If I meet a beautiful girl and ask her: »Please come
with me" and she passes by silently, she means:

»You are not a duke with a flying name, not a broad American with
Indian build, with horizontally resting eyes, with an air-filled
the lawns and the rivers flowing through them massaged skin, you
have not made any journeys to the great lakes and on them, which I know
not where to find them. So, please, why should I, a beautiful
Girl, go with you?'

»You forget, no automobile carries you in long jolts, rocking through
the street; I do not see the gentlemen of yours pressed into their clothes
entourage, murmuring blessings for you in a precise semicircle behind
You go; your breasts are well arranged in the bodice, but your thighs
and hips compensate for that abstinence; you wear a
Taffeta dress with pleated folds, as we saw last autumn
was a joy for everyone, and yet you smile -- this danger to life
on the body -- sometimes.«

»Yes, we are both right and, in order not to be irrefutable,
to become aware, don't we all prefer to go home alone
go.«




Food for thought for gentlemen riders


Nothing, when you think about it, can tempt you to be in a race
wanting to be the first.

The glory of being recognized as the best rider in a country is pleasing
when the orchestra started, was too strong for the next morning to
Regret could be prevented.

The envy of our opponents, cunning and rather influential people, must
the narrow trellis that we now ride through to that plain,
which was soon empty in front of us except for a few lapped riders, the small
riding towards the edge of the horizon.

Many of our friends rush to fix the profit and only about the
Shoulders away they shout their hurrah from the remote counters
us; but our best friends did not bet on our horse at all,
They feared that if there was a loss, they would have to be angry with us, now
but, since our horse was the first and they didn’t win anything,
They look around when we pass by and prefer to look at the stands
along.

The competitors backwards, firmly in the saddle, seek the misfortune
that has befallen them and the injustice that has been
is inflicted in any way; they take on a fresh appearance, as if
start a new race and a serious one after this children's game.

Many women find the winner ridiculous because he puffs himself up and
but doesn’t know what to do with the constant handshaking,
Saluting, bowing down and greetings into the distance, while the
The defeated have closed their mouths and the necks of their mostly
whinnying horses knock lightly.

Finally, it starts to rain from the cloudy sky.




The alley window


Anyone who lives in isolation and still wants to join in here and there,
who, taking into account the changes in the time of day, the weather,
of professional relationships and the like without further ado any
wants to see any arm he could hold on to, -- he will
without a street window, he won't be able to do much. And the situation with him is such that
he is not looking for anything and only as a tired man, his eyes up and down
between the audience and the sky, steps to his window sill, and he
does not want to and has tilted his head back a little, but they tear him
below the horses in their train of carriages and noise and thus finally
to human harmony.




Desire to become an Indian


If only one were an Indian, ready, and on the running
Horses, crooked in the air, repeatedly briefly trembled above the
trembling ground until the spurs were released, for there were no spurs,
until the reins were thrown away, for there were no reins, and hardly the land
saw before him as a smoothly mown heath, already without horse neck and
Horse head.




The trees


For we are like tree trunks in the snow. They seem to lie flat,
and with a little push you should be able to push them away. No, that can
You can't, because they are firmly attached to the ground. But look, even
that is only apparent.




Unhappiness


When it had already become unbearable -- once towards the evening in November
-- and I walk across the narrow carpet of my room like in a
racetrack, through the sight of the illuminated alley
frightened, turned again, and in the depth of the room, in the bottom of the
Mirrors got a new target again and cried out, just to
To hear a cry that has no answer and that has no power to
screaming, which therefore rises, without counterweight, and not
can stop, even if he falls silent, then opened from the wall
out the door, so hastily, because haste was necessary and even the
Cart horses down on the pavement like wild horses in the
Battle, the throats surrendered, rose up.

As a small ghost, a child drove out of the very dark corridor in which
the lamp was not yet lit, and remained standing on tiptoe, on
an imperceptibly swaying floor beam. From the twilight of the
Immediately blinded by the room, it wanted to quickly put its face into its
hands, but suddenly calmed down with a look at the window, in front of
whose cross the high haze of the street lighting finally
remained lying under the darkness. With its right elbow it held itself
in front of the open door upright on the wall of the room and let the draft of
outside around the joints of the feet, also the neck, also the
along the temples.

I looked a little, then I said "Hello" and took my skirt
from the stove screen because I didn't want to stand there half naked.
For a while I kept my mouth open so that the excitement could
my mouth. I had bad saliva in me, on my face
my eyelashes trembled, in short, I was missing nothing, but just
this, however, expected visit.

The child was still standing at the wall in the same place, it had the
right hand pressed against the wall and, red-cheeked, could see
never get tired of the fact that the whitewashed wall was coarse-grained and the
fingertips. I said, "Do you really want to come to me? Is it
No mistake? Nothing is easier than a mistake in this great house. I
My name is So-and-so and I live on the third floor. So am I the one you
want to visit?«

"Quiet, quiet!" said the child over his shoulder, "everything is already
correct."

»Then come further into the room, I want to open the door
close."

"I just closed the door. Don't bother."
Just calm down."

"Don't talk about trouble. But a lot of people live on this corridor,
All of them are of course my acquaintances; most of them now come from the
business; when they hear talking in a room, they simply believe
to have the right to open up and see what is going on. It is
once already. These people have completed their daily work;
they would submit themselves to the provisional evening freedom!
By the way, you know it too. Let me close the door."

"Well, what is it? What's wrong with you? As far as I'm concerned, the whole house
come in. And then again: I have already closed the door,
Do you think only you can close the door? I even
locked with a key.«

"Then that's good. I don't want anything more. With the key you wouldn't have
don't have to lock. And now just make yourself comfortable,
while you're here. You're my guest. Trust me.
completely. Just spread out without fear. I will not make you
To stay here, or to leave. Do I have to say that?
Do you feel so bad about me?'

"No. You really didn't have to say that. What's more, you should have
shouldn't have said it at all. I'm a child; why so much trouble with
me?«

"It's not that bad. Of course, a child. But they are not that small
Not you. You're already all grown up. If you were a girl,
You shouldn't just lock yourself in a room with me."

"We don't have to worry about that. I just wanted to say that
I know you so well, it protects me little, it only relieves you of
effort to lie to me. But nevertheless, you make me
Compliments. Stop that, I urge you, stop that.
comes that I do not know you everywhere and all the time, especially in this
Darkness. It would be much better if you turned on the light. No,
I'd rather not. At least I'll remember that you've already threatened me
have."

"What? I would have threatened you? But please. I'm so glad
that you are finally here. I say 'finally' because it is already so late
I cannot understand why you came so late. There is
it is possible that I spoke so confusedly in my joy and
that you understood it exactly like that. I give you the
I have agreed ten times, yes, I have threatened you with everything you want. --
No arguments, for heaven's sake! -- But how could you believe it?
How could you hurt me so? Why do you want to use all your power
spoil this little moment of your stay here? A stranger
would be more accommodating than you."

"I believe that; that was not wisdom. As close as a stranger
I am by nature the kindest person I can be.
Do you also know why the melancholy? Tell me that you like comedy
want to play, and I'm leaving right now."

"So? You dare to say that to me too? You are a little too bold.
In the end, you're in my room. You're rubbing your fingers like crazy.
on my wall. My room, my wall! And besides, what you
say, ridiculous, not just cheeky. You say your nature compels you,
to talk to me in this way. Really? Your nature compels you? That
is kind by your nature. Your nature is mine, and if I let go of
If I am naturally friendly to you, you must not
different.«

"Is that friendly?"

"I'm talking about the past."

"Do you know what I'll be like later?"

"I know nothing."

And I went to the bedside table where I lit the candle. I
At that time I had neither gas nor electric light in my room.
I sat at the table for a while until I got tired of it too,
put on the overcoat, took the hat from the sofa and blew out the candle.
As I was walking out, I caught myself in a chair leg.

On the stairs I met a tenant from the same floor.

"You're leaving again, you scoundrel?" he asked, on his two
Resting on the steps with legs spread out.

»What should I do?« I said, »now I have a ghost in the room
had.«

»You say that with the same dissatisfaction as if you were
found in the soup.«

"You're joking. But remember, a ghost is a ghost."

"Very true. But what if you don't believe in ghosts at all?"

"Do you really think I believe in ghosts? But what good does that do me
this disbelief?'

"Very simple. You don't have to be afraid anymore when a ghost
really comes to you.«

"Yes, but that's the secondary fear. The real fear
is the fear of the cause of the phenomenon. And this fear remains.
I have that in me, absolutely magnificently." I started to get nervous,
to search all my pockets.

»But since you were not afraid of the apparition itself, you would have
they can just ask about the cause!«

"You have obviously never spoken to ghosts. From them
You never get a clear answer. It's a back-and-forth.
These ghosts seem to be more in doubt about their existence,
than we are, which is no surprise given their frailty."

"But I've heard that you can feed them."

"You're well reported. That's possible. But who will do it?"

"Why not? If it's a female ghost, for example," he said, and
swung himself onto the upper step.

"Oh," I said, "but even then it doesn't stand for that."

I thought about it. My friend was already so high that he
to see, had to bend under a vault of the stairwell. »But
Nevertheless,' I cried, 'if you take away my ghost from up there,
then it's over between us, forever."

"But that was just a joke," he said, pulling his head back.

"Then it's good," I said and would have been able to take a quiet walk
But because I felt so abandoned, I went
I preferred to go upstairs and go to sleep.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REVIEW ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by US copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, applied to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for almost any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by US copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. lake
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or others
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by US copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements paragraph ofs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this to paragraph the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees spend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by US copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or others
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, Strict
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may request a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY CHILD, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.Q.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The disability or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of others
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the US unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

