*** START OF THE EBOOK ***
NOCHAPTERS
One evening, Blumfeld, an elderly bachelor, was climbing up to his apartment - a laborious undertaking, for he lived on the sixth floor. While climbing up he
thought, as he had so often recently, how unpleasant this utterly lonely life was: to
reach his empty rooms he had to climb these six floors almost in secret, there put on
his dressing gown, again almost in secret, light his pipe, read a little of the French
magazine to which he had been subscribing for years, at the same time sip at a
homemade kirsch, and finally, after half an hour, go to bed, but not before having
completely rearranged his bedclothes which the unteachable charwoman would insist
on arranging in her own way. Some companion, someone to witness these activities,
would have been very welcome to Blumfeld. He had already been wondering whether
he shouldn't acquire a little dog. These animals are gay and above all grateful and loyal;
one of Blumfeld's colleagues has a dog of this kind; it follows no one but its master and
when it hasn't seen him for a few moments it greets him at once with loud barkings, by
which it is evidently trying to express its joy at once more finding that extraordinary
benefactor, its master. True, a dog also has its drawbacks. However well kept it may
be, it is bound to dirty the room. This just cannot be avoided; one cannot give it a hot
bath each time before letting it into the room; besides, its health couldn't stand that.
Blumfeld, on the other hand, can't stand dirt in his room. To him cleanliness is
essential, and several times a week he is obliged to have words with his charwoman,
who is unfortunately not very painstaking in this respect. Since she is hard of hearing
he usually drags her by the arm to those spots in the room which he finds lacking in
cleanliness. By this strict discipline he has achieved in his room a neatness more or less

deliberately introducing into his room the dirt which hitherto he had been so careful
to avoid. Fleas, the dog's constant companions, would appear. And once fleas were
there, it would not be long before Blumfeld would be abandoning his comfortable
room to the dog and looking for another one. Uncleanliness, however, is but one of the
drawbacks of dogs. Dogs also fall ill and no one really understands dogs' diseases. Then
the animal sits in a corner or limps about, whimpers, coughs, chokes from some pain;
one wraps it in a rug, whistles a little melody, offers it milk -- in short, one nurses it in
the hope that this, as indeed is possible, is a passing sickness while it may be a serious,
disgusting, and contagious disease. And even if the dog remains healthy, one day it will
grow old, one won't have the heart to get rid of the faithful animal in time, and then
comes the moment when one's own age peers out at one from the dog's oozing eyes.
Then one has to cope with the half-blind, weak-lunged animal all but immobile with
fat, and in this way pay dearly for the pleasures the dog once had given. Much as
Blumfeld would like to have a dog at this moment, he would rather go on climbing the
stairs alone for another thirty years than be burdened later on by such an old dog
which, sighing louder than he, would drag itself up, step by step.
So Blumfeld will remain alone, after all; he really feels none of the old maid's
longing to have around her some submissive living creature that she can protect,
lavish her affection upon, and continue to serve -- for which purpose a cat, a canary,
even a goldfish would suffice -- or, if this cannot be, rest content with flowers on the
window sill. Blumfeld only wants a companion, an animal to which he doesn't have to
pay much attention, which doesn't mind an occasional kick, which even, in an
emergency, can spend the night in the street, but which nevertheless, when Blumfeld
feels like it, is promptly at his disposal with its barking, jumping, and licking of hands.
This is what Blumfeld wants, but since, as he realizes, it cannot be had without serious
drawbacks, he renounces it, and yet -- in accordance with his thoroughgoing
disposition -- the idea from time to time, this evening, for instance, occurs to him
again.

While taking the key from his pocket outside his room, he is startled by a
sound coming from within. A peculiar rattling sound, very lively but very regular.
Since Blumfeld has just been thinking of dogs, it reminds him of the sounds produced
by paws pattering one after the other over a floor. But paws don't rattle, so it can't be
paws. He quickly unlocks the door and switches on the light. He is not prepared for
what he sees. For this is magic -- two small white celluloid balls with blue stripes
jumping up and down side by side on the parquet; when one of them touches the floor
the other is in the air, a game they continue ceaselessly to play. At school one day
Blumfeld had seen some little pellets jumping about like this during a well-known
electrical experiment, but these are comparatively large balls jumping freely about in
the room and no electrical experiment is being made. Blumfeld bends down to get a
good look at them. They are undoubtedly ordinary balls, they probably contain several
smaller balls, and it is these that produce the rattling sound. Blumfeld gropes in the air
to find out whether they are hanging from some threads -- no, they are moving
entirely on their own. A pity Blumfeld isn't a small child, two balls like these would
have been a happy surprise for him, whereas now the whole thing gives him rather an
unpleasant feeling. It's not quite pointless after all to live in secret as an unnoticed
bachelor, now someone, no matter who, has penetrated this secret and sent him these
two strange balls.
He tries to catch one but they retreat before him, thus luring him on to follow
them through the room. It's really too silly, he thinks, running after balls like this; he
stands still and realizes that the moment he abandons the pursuit, they too remain on
the same spot. I will try to catch them all the same, he thinks again, and hurries toward
them. They immediately run away, but Blumfeld, his legs apart, forces them into a
corner of the room, and there, in front of a trunk, he manages to catch one ball. It's a
small cool ball, and it turns in his hand, clearly anxious to slip away. And the other
ball, too, as though aware of its comrade's distress, jumps higher than before,
extending the leaps until it touches Blumfeld's hand. It beats against his hand, beats in

encloses the ball so completely, springs even higher and is probably trying to reach
Blumfeld's face. Blumfeld could catch this ball too, and lock them both up somewhere,
but at the moment it strikes him as too humiliating to take such measures against two
little balls. Besides, it's fun owning these balls, and soon enough they'll grow tired, roll
under the cupboard, and be quiet. Despite this deliberation, however, Blumfeld, near
to anger, flings the ball to the ground, and it is a miracle that in doing so the delicate,
all but transparent celluloid cover doesn't break. Without hesitation the two balls
resume their former low, well-coordinated jumps.
Blumfeld undresses calmly, arranges his clothes in the wardrobe which he
always inspects carefully to make sure the charwoman has left everything in order.
Once or twice he glances over his shoulder at the balls, which, unpursued, seem to be
pursuing him; they have followed him and are now jumping close behind him.
Blumfeld puts on his dressing gown and sets out for the opposite wall to fetch one of
the pipes which are hanging in a rack. Before turning around he instinctively kicks his
foot out backwards, but the balls know how to get out of its way and remain
untouched. As Blumfeld goes off to fetch the pipe the balls at once follow close behind
him; he shuffles along in his slippers, taking irregular steps, yet each step is followed
almost without pause by the sound of the balls; they are keeping pace with him. To see
how the balls manage to do this, Blumfeld turns suddenly around. But hardly has he
turned when the balls describe a semicircle and are already behind him again, and this
they repeat every time he turns. Like submissive companions, they try to avoid
appearing in front of Blumfeld. Up to the present they have evidently dared to do so
only in order to introduce themselves; now, however, it seems they have actually
entered into his service.
Hitherto, when faced with situations he couldn't master, Blumfeld had always
chosen to behave as though he hadn't noticed anything. It had often helped and
usually improved the situation. This, then, is what he does now; he takes up a position

care from the tobacco pouch close at hand, and allows the balls to continue their
jumping behind him. But he hesitates to approach the table, for to hear the sound of
the jumps coinciding with that of his own steps almost hurts him. So there he stands,
and while taking an unnecessarily long time to fill his pipe he measures the distance
separating him from the table. At last, however, he overcomes his faintheartedness
and covers the distance with such stamping of feet that he cannot hear the balls. But
the moment he is seated he can hear them jumping up and down behind his chair as
distinctly as ever.
Above the table, within reach, a shelf is nailed to the wall on which stands the
bottle of kirsch surrounded by little glasses. Beside it, in a pile, lie several copies of the
French magazine. (This very day the latest issue has arrived and Blumfeld takes it
down. He quite forgets the kirsch; he even has the feeling that today he is proceeding
with his usual activities only to console himself, for he feels no genuine desire to read.
Contrary to his usual habit of carefully turning one page after the other, he opens the
magazine at random and there finds a large photograph. He forces himself to examine
it in detail. It shows a meeting between the Czar of Russia and the President of France.
This takes place on a ship. All about as far as can be seen are many other ships, the
smoke from their funnels vanishing in the bright sky. Both Czar and President have
rushed toward each other with long strides and are clasping one another by the hand.
Behind the Czar as well as behind the President stand two men. By comparison with
the gay faces of the Czar and the President, the faces of their attendants are very
solemn, the eyes of each group focused on their master. Lower down -- the scene
evidently takes place on the top deck -- stand long lines of saluting sailors cut off by
the margin. Gradually Blumfeld contemplates the picture with more interest, then
holds it a little further away and looks at it with blinking eyes. He has always had a
taste for such imposing scenes. The way the chief personages clasp each other's hand
so naturally, so cordially and lightheartedly, this he finds most lifelike. And it's just as
appropriate that the attendants -- high-ranking gentlemen, of course, with their names

And instead of helping himself to everything he needs, Blumfeld sits there
tense, staring at the bowl of his still unlit pipe. He is lying in wait. Suddenly, quite
unexpectedly, his numbness leaves him and with a jerk he turns around in his chair.
But the balls, equally alert, or perhaps automatically following the law governing them,
also change their position the moment Blumfeld turns, and hide behind his back.
Blumfeld now sits with his back to the table, the cold pipe in his hand. And now the
balls jump under the table and, since there's a rug there, they are less audible. This is a
great advantage: only faint, hollow noises can be heard, one has to pay great attention
to catch their sound. Blumfeld, however, does pay great attention, and hears them
distinctly. But this is so only for the moment, in a little while he probably won't hear
them any more. The fact that they cannot make themselves more audible on the rug
strikes Blumfeld as a great weakness on the part of the balls. What one has to do is lay
one or even better two rugs under them and they are all but powerless. Admittedly
only for a limited time, and besides, their very existence wields a certain power.
Right now Blumfeld could have made good use of a dog, a wild young animal
would soon have dealt with these balls; he imagines this dog trying to catch them with
its paws, chasing them from their positions, hunting them all over the room, and
finally getting hold of them between its teeth. It's quite possible that before long
Blumfeld will acquire a dog.
For the moment, however, the balls have no one to fear but Blumfeld, and he
has no desire to destroy them just now, perhaps he lacks the necessary determination.
He comes home in the evening tired from work and just when he is in need of some
rest he is faced with this surprise. Only now does he realize how tired he really is. No
doubt he will destroy the balls, and that in the near future, but not just yet, probably
not until tomorrow. If one looks at the whole thing with an unprejudiced eye, the balls
behave modestly enough. From time to time, for instance, they could jump into the
foreground, show themselves, and then return again to their positions, or they could

the muffling effect of the rug. But this they don't do, they don't want to irritate
Blumfeld unduly, they are evidently confining themselves to what is absolutely
necessary.
Even this measured necessity, however, is quite sufficient to spoil Blumfeld's
rest at the table. He has been sitting there only a few minutes and is already
considering going to bed. One of his motives for this is that he can't smoke here, for he
has left the matches on his bedside table. Thus he would have to fetch these matches,
but once having reached the bedside table he might as well stay there and lie down.
For this he has an ulterior motive: he thinks that the balls, with their mania for
keeping behind him, will jump onto the bed, and that there, in lying down, on purpose
or not, he will squash them. The objection that what would then remain of the balls
could still go on jumping, he dismisses. Even the unusual must have its limits.
Complete balls jump anyway, even if not incessantly, but fragments of balls never
jump, and consequently will not jump in this case, either. "Up!" he shouts, having
grown almost reckless from this reflection and, the balls still behind him, he stamps off
to bed. His hope seems to be confirmed, for when he purposely takes up a position
quite near the bed, one ball promptly springs onto it. Then, however, the unexpected
occurs: the other ball disappears under the bed. The possibility that the balls could
jump under the bed as well had not occurred to Blumfeld. He is outraged about the
one ball, although he is aware how unjust this is, for by jumping under the bed the ball
fulfills its duty perhaps better than the ball on the bed. Now everything depends on
which place the balls decide to choose, for Blumfeld does not believe that they can
work separately for any length of time. And sure enough a moment later the ball on
the floor also jumps onto the bed. Now I've got them, thinks Blumfeld, hot with joy,
and tears his dressing gown from his body to throw himself into bed. At that moment,
however, the very same ball jumps back under the bed. Overwhelmed with
disappointment, Blumfeld almost collapses. Very likely the ball just took a good look
around up there and decided it didn't like it. And now the other one has followed, too,

me all night," thinks Blumfeld, biting his lips and nodding his head.
He feels gloomy, without actually knowing what harm the balls could do him in
the night. He is a good sleeper, he will easily be able to ignore so slight a noise. To
make quite sure of this and mindful of his past experience, he lays two rugs on the
floor. It's as if he owned a little dog for which he wants to make a soft bed. And as
though the balls had also grown tired and sleepy, their jumping has become lower and
slower than before. As Blumfeld kneels beside the bed, lamp in hand, he thinks for a
moment that the balls might come to rest on the rug -- they fall so weakly, roll so
slowly along. Then, however, they dutifully rise again. Yet it is quite possible that in
the morning when Blumfeld looks under the bed he'll find there two quiet, harmless
children's balls.
But it seems that they may not even be able to keep up their jumping until the
morning, for as soon as Blumfeld is in bed he doesn't hear them anymore. He strains
his ears, leans out of bed to listen -- not a sound. The effect of the rugs can't be as
strong as that; the only explanation is that the balls are no longer jumping, either
because they aren't able to bounce themselves off the rug and have therefore
abandoned jumping for the time being or, which is more likely, they will never jump
again. Blumfeld could get up and see exactly what's going on, but in his relief at finding
peace at last he prefers to remain where he is. He would rather not risk disturbing the
pacified balls even with his eyes. Even smoking he happily renounces, turns over on his
side, and promptly goes to sleep.
But he does not remain undisturbed; as usual he sleeps without dreaming, but
very restlessly. Innumerable times during the night he is startled by the delusion that
someone is knocking at his door. He knows quite well that no one is knocking; who
would knock at night and at his lonely bachelor's door? Yet although he knows this for
certain, he is startled again and again and each time glances in suspense at the door,

to count how many times he has been woken but, dizzy from the huge numbers he
arrives at, he falls back to sleep again. He thinks he knows where the knocking comes
from; not from the door, but somewhere quite different; being heavy with sleep,
however, he cannot quite remember on what his suspicions are based. All he knows is
that innumerable tiny unpleasant sounds accumulate before producing the great
strong knocking. He would happily suffer all the unpleasantness of the small sounds if
he could be spared the actual knocking, but for some reason it's too late; he cannot
interfere, the moment has passed, he can't even speak, his mouth opens but all that
comes out is a silent yawn, and furious at this he thrusts his face into the pillows. Thus
the night passes.
In the morning he is awakened by the charwoman's knocking; with a sigh of
relief he welcomes the gentle tap on the door whose inaudibility has in the past always
been one of his sources of complaint. He is about to shout "Come in!" when he hears
another lively, faint, yet all but belligerent knocking. It's the balls under the bed. Have
they woken up? Have they, unlike him, gathered new strength overnight? "Just a
moment," shouts Blumfeld to the charwoman, jumps out of bed, and, taking great care
to keep the balls behind him, throws himself on the floor, his back still toward them;
then, twisting his head over his shoulder, he glances at the balls and nearly lets out a
curse. Like children pushing away blankets that annoy them at night, the balls have
apparently spent all night pushing the rugs, with tiny twitching movements, so far
away from under the bed that they are now once more on the parquet, where they can
continue making their noise. "Back onto the rugs!" says Blumfeld with an angry face,
and only when the balls, thanks to the rugs, have become quiet again, does he call in
the charwoman. While she -- a fat, dull-witted, stiff-backed woman -- is laying the
breakfast on the table and doing the few necessary chores, Blumfeld stands motionless
in his dressing gown by his bed so as to keep the balls in their place. With his eyes he
follows the charwoman to see whether she notices anything. This, since she is hard of
hearing, is very unlikely, and the fact that Blumfeld thinks he sees the charwoman

eyebrows, he puts down to his overwrought condition caused by a bad night's sleep. It
would relieve him if he could persuade the charwoman to speed up her work, but if
anything she is slower than usual. She loads herself laboriously with Blumfeld's clothes
and shuffles out with them into the corridor, stays away a long time, and the din she
makes beating the clothes echoes in his ears with slow, monotonous thuds. And
during all this time Blumfeld has to remain on the bed, cannot move for fear of
drawing the balls behind him, has to let the coffee -- which he likes to drink as hot as
possible -- get cold, and can do nothing but stare at the drawn blinds behind which the
day is dimly dawning. At last the charwoman has finished, bids him good morning,
and is about to leave; but before she actually goes she hesitates by the door, moves her
lips a little, and takes a long look at Blumfeld. Blumfeld is about to remonstrate when
she at last departs. Blumfeld longs to fling the door open and shout after her that she is
a stupid, idiotic old woman. However, when he reflects on what he actually has against
her, he can only think of the paradox of her having clearly noticed nothing and yet
trying to give the impression that she has. How confused his thoughts have become!
And all on account of a bad night. Some explanation for his poor sleep he finds in the
fact that last night he deviated from his usual habits by not smoking or drinking any
schnapps. When for once I don't smoke or drink schnapps -- and this is the result of
his reflections -- I sleep badly.
From now on he is going to take better care of his health, and he begins by
fetching some cotton wool from his medicine chest which hangs over his bedside table
and putting two little wads of it into his ears. Then he stands up and takes a trial step.
Although the balls do follow he can hardly hear them; the addition of another wad
makes them quite inaudible. Blumfeld takes a few more steps; nothing particularly
unpleasant happens. Everyone for himself, Blumfeld as well as the balls, and although
they are bound to one another they don't disturb each other. Only once, when
Blumfeld turns around rather suddenly and one ball fails to make the
countermovement fast enough, does he touch it with his knee. But this is the only

instead of sleeping last night, he had gone for a long walk; he washes in cold,
exceedingly refreshing water, and puts on his clothes. He still hasn't pulled up the
blinds; rather, as a precaution, he has preferred to remain in semidarkness; he has no
wish for the balls to be seen by other eyes. But now that he is ready to go he has
somehow to provide for the balls in case they should dare -- not that he thinks they
will -- to follow him into the street. He thinks of a good solution, opens the large
wardrobe, and places himself with his back to it. As though divining his intention, the
balls steer clear of the wardrobe's interior, taking advantage of every inch of space
between Blumfeld and the wardrobe; when there's no other alternative they jump into
the wardrobe for a moment, but when faced by the dark out they promptly jump
again. Rather than be lured over the edge further into the wardrobe, they neglect their
duty and stay by Blumfeld's side. But their little ruses avail them nothing, for now
Blumfeld himself climbs backward into the wardrobe and they have to follow him.
And with this their fate has been sealed, for on the floor of the wardrobe lie various
smallish objects such as boots, boxes, small trunks which, although carefully arranged
-- Blumfeld now regrets this -- nevertheless considerably hamper the balls. And when
Blumfeld, having by now pulled the door almost to, jumps out of it with an enormous
leap such as he has not made for years, slams the door, and turns the key, the balls are
imprisoned. "Well, that worked," thinks Blumfeld, wiping the sweat from his face.
What a din the balls are making in the wardrobe! It sounds as though they are
desperate. Blumfeld, on the other hand, is very contented. He leaves the room and
already the deserted corridor has a soothing effect on him. He takes the wool out of his
ears and is enchanted by the countless sounds of the waking house. Few people are to
be seen, it's still very early.
Downstairs in the hall in front of the low door leading to the charwoman's
basement apartment stands that woman's ten-year-old son. The image of his mother,
not one feature of the woman has been omitted in this child's face. Bandy-legged,
hands in his trouser pockets, he stands there wheezing, for he already has a goiter and

path, usually quickens his step to spare himself the spectacle, today he almost feels like
pausing for a moment. Even if the boy has been brought into the world by this woman
and shows every sign of his origin, he is nevertheless a child, the thoughts of a child
still dwell in this shapeless head, and if one were to speak to him sensibly and ask him
something, he would very likely answer in a bright voice, innocent and reverential, and
after some inner struggle one could bring oneself to pat these cheeks. Although this is
what Blumfeld thinks, he nevertheless passes him by. In the street he realizes that the
weather is pleasanter than he had suspected from his room. The morning mist has
dispersed and patches of blue sky have appeared, brushed by a strong wind. Blumfeld
has the balls to thank for his having left his room much earlier than usual; even the
paper he has left unread on the table; in any case he has saved a great deal of time and
can now afford to walk slowly. It is remarkable how little he worries about the balls
now that he is separated from them. So long as they were following him they could
have been considered as something belonging to him, something which, in passing
judgment on his person, had somehow to be taken into consideration. Now, however,
they were mere toys in his wardrobe at home. And it occurs to Blumfeld that the best
way of rendering the balls harmless would be to put them to their original use. There
in the hall stands the boy; Blumfeld will give him the balls, not lend them, but actually
present them to him, which is surely tantamount to ordering their destruction. And
even if they were to remain intact they would mean even less in the boy's hands than
in the wardrobe, the whole house would watch the boy playing with them, other
children would join in, and the general opinion that the balls are things to play with
and in no way life companions of Blumfeld would be firmly and irrefutably established.
Blumfeld runs back into the house. The boy has just gone down the basement stairs
and is about to open the door. So Blumfeld has to call the boy and pronounce his
name, a name that to him seems as ludicrous as everything else connected with the
child. "Alfred! Alfred!" he shouts. The boy hesitates for a long time. "Come here!"
shouts Blumfeld, "I've got something for you." The janitor's two little girls appear from
the door opposite and, full of curiosity, take up positions on either side of Blumfeld.

he doesn't come at once. Without taking their eyes off Blumfeld they beckon to the
boy, but cannot fathom what kind of present is awaiting Alfred. Tortured with
curiosity, they hop from one foot to the other. Blumfeld laughs at them as well as at
the boy. The latter seems to have figured it all out and climbs stiffly, clumsily up the
steps. Not even in his gait can he manage to belie his mother, who, incidentally, has
appeared in the basement doorway. To make sure that the charwoman also
understands and in the hope that she will supervise the carrying out of his
instructions, should it be necessary, Blumfeld shouts excessively loud. "Up in my
room," says Blumfeld, "I have two lovely balls. Would you like to have them?" Not
knowing how to behave, the boy simply screws up his mouth, turns around, and looks
inquiringly down at his mother. The girls, however, promptly begin to jump around
Blumfeld and ask him for the balls. "You will be allowed to play with them too,"
Blumfeld tells them, but waits for the boy's answer. He could of course give the balls to
the girls, but they strike him as too unreliable and for the moment he has more
confidence in the boy. Meanwhile, the latter, without having exchanged a word, has
taken counsel with his mother and nods his assent to Blumfeld's repeated question.
"Then listen," says Blumfeld, who is quite prepared to receive no thanks for his gift.
"Your mother has the key of my door, you must borrow it from her. But here is the key
of my wardrobe, and in the wardrobe you will find the balls. Take good care to lock the
wardrobe and the room again. But with the balls you can do what you like and you
don't have to bring them back. Have you understood me?"
Unfortunately, the boy has not understood. Blumfeld has tried to make
everything particularly clear to this hopelessly dense creature, but for this very reason
has repeated everything too often, has in turn too often mentioned keys, room, and
wardrobe, and as a result the boy stares at him as though he were rather a seducer
than his benefactor. The girls, on the other hand, have understood everything
immediately, press against Blumfeld, and stretch out their hands for the key. "Wait a
moment," says Blumfeld, by now annoyed with them all. Time, moreover, is passing,

understood him and take matters in hand for the boy! Instead of which she still stands
down by the door, smiles with the affectation of the bashful deaf, and is probably
under the impression that Blumfeld up there has suddenly fallen for the boy and is
hearing him his lessons. Blumfeld on the other hand can't very well climb down the
basement stairs and shout into the charwoman's ear to make her son for God's sake
relieve him of the balls! It had required enough of his self-control as it was to entrust
the key of his wardrobe for a whole day to this family. It is certainly not in order to
save himself trouble that he is handing the key to the boy rather than himself leading
the boy up and there giving him the balls. But he can't very well first give the balls
away and then immediately deprive the boy of them by -- as would be bound to
happen -- drawing them after him as his followers. "So you still don't understand me?"
asks Blumfeld almost wistfully after having started a fresh explanation which, however,
he immediately interrupts at sight of the boy's vacant stare. So vacant a stare renders
one helpless. It could tempt one into saying more than one intends, if only to fill the
vacancy with sense. Whereupon "We'll fetch the balls for him!" shout the girls. They
are shrewd and have realized that they can obtain the balls only through using the boy
as an intermediary, but that they themselves have to bring about this mediation. From
the janitor's room a clock strikes, warning Blumfeld to hurry. "Well, then, take the
key," says Blumfeld, and the key is more snatched from his hand than given by him. He
would have handed it to the boy with infinitely more confidence. "The key to the room
you'll have to get from the woman," Blumfeld adds. "And when you return with the
balls you must hand both keys to her." "Yes, yes!" shout the girls and run down the
steps. They know everything, absolutely everything; and as though Blumfeld were
infected by the boy's denseness, he is unable to understand how they could have
grasped everything so quickly from his explanations.
Now they are already tugging at the charwoman's skirt but, tempting as it
would be, Blumfeld cannot afford to watch them carrying out their task, not only
because it's already late, but also because he has no desire to be present at the

girls first open the door of his room. After all, how does he know what else he might
have to expect from these balls! And so for the second time this morning he leaves the
house. He has one last glimpse of the charwoman defending herself against the girls,
and of the boy stirring his bandy legs to come to his mother's assistance. It's beyond
Blumfeld's comprehension why a creature like this servant should prosper and
propagate in this world.
While on his way to the linen factory, where Blumfeld is employed, thoughts
about his work gradually get the upper hand. He quickens his step and, despite the
delay caused by the boy, he is the first to arrive in his office. This office is a glassenclosed room containing a writing desk for Blumfeld and two standing desks for the
two assistants subordinate to him. Although these standing desks are so small and
narrow as to suggest they are meant for schoolchildren, this office is very crowded and
the assistants cannot sit down, for then there would be no place for Blumfeld's chair.
As a result they stand all day, pressed against their desks. For them of course this is
very uncomfortable, but it also makes it very difficult for Blumfeld to keep an eye on
them. They often press eagerly against their desks not so much in order to work as to
whisper to one another or even to take forty winks. They give Blumfeld a great deal of
trouble; they don't help him sufficiently with the enormous amount of work that is
imposed on him. This work involves supervising the whole distribution of fabrics and
cash among the women homeworkers who are employed by the factory for the
manufacture of certain fancy commodities. To appreciate the magnitude of this task
an intimate knowledge of the general conditions is necessary. But since Blumfeld's
immediate superior has died some years ago, no one any longer possesses this
knowledge, which is also why Blumfeld cannot grant anyone the right to pronounce an
opinion on his work. The manufacturer, Herr Ottomar, for instance, clearly
underestimates Blumfeld's work; no doubt he recognizes that in the course of twenty
years Blumfeld has deserved well of the factory, and this he acknowledges not only
because he is obliged to, but also because he respects Blumfeld as a loyal, trustworthy

conducted by methods more simple and therefore in every respect more profitable
than those employed by Blumfeld. It is said, and it is probably not incorrect, that
Ottomar shows himself so rarely in Blumfeld's department simply to spare himself the
annoyance that the sight of Blumfeld's working methods causes him. To be so
unappreciated is undoubtedly sad for Blumfeld, but there is no remedy, for he cannot
very well compel Ottomar to spend let us say a whole month on end in Blumfeld's
department in order to study the great variety of work being accomplished there, to
apply his own allegedly better methods, and to let himself be convinced of Blumfeld's
soundness by the collapse of the department -- which would be the inevitable result.
And so Blumfeld carries on his work undeterred as before, gives a little start whenever
Ottomar appears after a long absence, then with the subordinate's sense of duty makes
a feeble effort to explain to Ottomar this or that arrangement, whereupon the latter,
his eyes lowered and giving a silent nod, passes on. But what worries Blumfeld more
than this lack of appreciation is the thought that one day he will be compelled to leave
his job, the immediate consequence of which will be pandemonium, a confusion no
one will be able to straighten out because so far as he knows there isn't a single soul in
the factory capable of replacing him and of carrying on his job in a manner that could
be relied upon to prevent months of the most serious interruptions. Needless to say, if
the boss underestimates an employee the latter's colleagues try their best to surpass
him in this respect. In consequence everyone underestimates Blumfeld's work; no one
considers it necessary to spend any time training in Blumfeld's department, and when
new employees are hired not one of them is ever assigned to Blumfeld. As a result
Blumfeld's department lacks a younger generation to carry on. When Blumfeld, who
up to then had been managing the entire department with the help of only one
servant, demanded an assistant, weeks of bitter fighting ensued. Almost every day
Blumfeld appeared in Ottomar's office and explained to him calmly and in minute
detail why an assistant was needed in his department. He was needed not by any
means because Blumfeld wished to spare himself, Blumfeld had no intention of
sparing himself, he was doing more than his share of work and this he had no desire to

business had grown, how every department had been correspondingly enlarged, with
the exception of Blumfeld's department, which was invariably forgotten! And would he
consider too how the work had increased just there! When Blumfeld had entered the
firm, a time Herr Ottomar probably could not remember, they had employed some ten
seamstresses, today the number varied between fifty and sixty. Such a job requires
great energy; Blumfeld could guarantee that he was completely wearing himself out in
this work, but that he will continue to master it completely he can henceforth no
longer guarantee. True, Herr Ottomar had never flatly refused Blumfeld's requests,
this was something he could not do to an old employee, but the manner in which he
hardly listened, in which he talked to others over Blumfeld's head, made halfhearted
promises and had forgotten everything in a few days -- this behavior was insulting, to
say the least. Not actually to Blumfeld, Blumfeld is no romantic, pleasant as honor and
recognition may be, Blumfeld can do without them, in spite of everything he will stick
to his desk as long as it is at all possible, in any case he is in the right, and right, even
though on occasion it may take a long time, must prevail in the end. True, Blumfeld
has at last been given two assistants, but what assistants! One might have thought
Ottomar had realized he could express his contempt for the department even better by
granting rather than by refusing it these assistants. It was even possible that Ottomar
had kept Blumfeld waiting so long because he was looking for two assistants just like
these, and -- as may be imagined -- took a long time to find them. And now of course
Blumfeld could no longer complain; if he did, the answer could easily be foreseen: after
all, he had asked for one assistant and had been given two, that's how cleverly Ottomar
had arranged things. Needless to say, Blumfeld complained just the same, but only
because his predicament all but forced him to do so, not because he still hoped for any
redress. Nor did he complain emphatically, but only by the way, whenever the
occasion arose. Nevertheless, among his spiteful colleagues the rumor soon spread
that someone had asked Ottomar if it were really possible that Blumfeld, who after all
had been given such unusual aid, was still complaining. To which Ottomar answered
that this was correct, Blumfeld was still complaining, and rightly so. He, Ottomar, had

each seamstress, in other words some sixty in all. In case this number should prove
insufficient, however, he would let him have even more and would not cease until the
bedlam, which had been developing for years in Blumfeld's department, was complete.
Now it cannot be denied that in this remark Ottomar's manner of speech had been
cleverly imitated, but Blumfeld had no doubts whatever that Ottomar would not
dream of speaking about him in such a way. The whole thing was a fabrication of the
loafers in the offices on the first floor. Blumfeld ignored it -- if only he could as calmly
have ignored the presence of the assistants! But there they stood, and could not be
spirited away. Pale, weak children. According to their credentials they had already
passed school age, but in reality this was difficult to believe. In fact their rightful place
was so clearly at their mother's knee that one would hardly have dared to entrust them
to a teacher. They still couldn't even move properly; standing up for any length of time
tired them inordinately, especially when they first arrived. When left to themselves
they promptly doubled up in their weakness, standing hunched and crooked in their
corner. Blumfeld tried to point out to them that if they went on giving in to their
indolence they would become cripples for life. To ask the assistants to make the
slightest move was to take a risk; once when one of them had been ordered to carry
something a short distance, he had run so eagerly that he had banged his knee against
a desk. The room had been full of seamstresses, the desks covered in merchandise, but
Blumfeld had been obliged to neglect everything and take the sobbing assistant into
the office and there bandage his wound. Yet even this zeal on the part of the assistant
was superficial; like actual children they tried once in a while to excel, but far more
often -- indeed almost always -- they tried to divert their superior's attention and to
cheat him. Once, at a time of the most intensive work, Blumfeld had rushed past them,
dripping with sweat, and had observed them secretly swapping stamps among the
bales of merchandise. He had felt like banging them on the head with his fists, it would
have been the only possible punishment for such behavior, but they were after all only
children and Blumfeld could not very well knock children down. And so he continued
to put up with them. Originally he had imagined that the assistants would help him

much effort and vigilance. He had imagined himself standing in the center behind his
desk, keeping an eye on everything, and making the entries in the books while the
assistants ran to and fro, distributing everything according to his orders. He had
imagined that his supervision, which, sharp as it was, could not cope with such a
crowd, would be complemented by the assistants' attention; he had hoped that these
assistants would gradually acquire experience, cease depending entirely on his orders,
and finally learn to discriminate on their own between the seamstresses as to their
trustworthiness and requirements. Blumfeld soon realized that all these hopes had
been in vain and that he could not afford to let them even talk to the seamstresses.
From the beginning they had ignored some of the seamstresses, either from fear or
dislike; others to whom they felt partial they would sometimes run to meet at the door.
To them the assistants would bring whatever the women wanted, pressing it almost
secretly into their hands, although the seamstresses were perfectly entitled to receive
it, would collect on a bare shelf for these favorites various cuttings, worthless
remnants, but also a few still useful odds and ends, waving them blissfully at the
women behind Blumfeld's back and in return having sweets popped into their mouths.
Blumfeld of course soon put an end to this mischief and the moment the seamstresses
arrived he ordered the assistants back into their glass-enclosed cubicles. But for a long
time they considered this to be a grave injustice, they sulked, willfully broke their nibs,
and sometimes, although not daring to raise their heads, even knocked loudly against
the glass panes in order to attract the seamstresses' attention to the bad treatment that
in their opinion they were suffering at Blumfeld's hands.
The wrong they do themselves the assistants cannot see. For instance, they
almost always arrive late at the office. Blumfeld, their superior, who from his earliest
youth has considered it natural to arrive half an hour before the office opens -- not
from ambition or an exaggerated sense of duty but simply from a certain feeling of
decency -- often has to wait more than an hour for his assistants. Chewing his
breakfast roll he stands behind his desk, looking through the accounts in the

else when suddenly he receives such a shock that his pen continues to tremble in his
hand for some while afterwards. One of the assistants has dashed in, looking as though
he is about to collapse; he is holding on to something with one hand while the other is
pressed against his heaving chest. All this, however, simply means that he is making
excuses for being late, excuses so absurd that Blumfeld purposely ignores them, for if
he didn't he would have to give the young man a well-deserved thrashing. As it is, he
just glances at him for a moment, points with outstretched hand at the cubicle, and
turns back to his work. Now one really might expect the assistant to appreciate his
superior's kindness and hurry to his place. No, he doesn't hurry, he dawdles about, he
walks on tiptoe, slowly placing one foot in front of the other. Is he trying to ridicule his
superior? No. Again it's just that mixture of fear and self-complacency against which
one is powerless. How else explain the fact that even today Blumfeld, who has himself
arrived unusually late in the office and now after a long wait -- he doesn't feel like
checking the books -- sees, through the clouds of dust raised by the stupid servant
with his broom, the two assistants sauntering peacefully along the street? Arm in arm,
they appear to be telling one another important things which, however, are sure to
have only the remotest and very likely irreverent connections with the office. The
nearer they approach the glass door, the slower they walk. One of them seizes the door
handle but fails to turn it; they just go on talking, listening, laughing. "Hurry out and
open the door for our gentlemen!" shouts Blumfeld at the servant, throwing up his
hands. But when the assistants come in, Blumfeld no longer feels like quarreling,
ignores their greetings, and goes to his desk. He starts doing his accounts, but now and
again glances up to see what his assistants are up to. One of them seems to be very
tired and rubs his eyes. When hanging up his overcoat he takes the opportunity to lean
against the wall. On the street he seemed lively enough, but the proximity of work tires
him. The other assistant, however, is eager to work, but only work of a certain kind.
For a long time it has been his wish to be allowed to sweep. But this is work to which
he is not entitled; sweeping is exclusively the servant's job; in itself Blumfeld would
have nothing against the assistant sweeping, let the assistant sweep, he can't make a

earlier, before the servant begins to sweep, and not spend on it time that is reserved
exclusively for office work. But since the young man is totally deaf to any sensible
argument, at least the servant -- that half-blind old buffer whom the boss would
certainly not tolerate in any department but Blumfeld's and who is still alive only by
the grace of the boss and God -- at least the servant might be sensible and hand the
broom for a moment to the young man who, being clumsy, would soon lose his
interest and run after the servant with the broom in order to persuade him to go on
sweeping. It appears, however, that the servant feels especially responsible for the
sweeping; one can see how he, the moment the young man approaches him, tries to
grasp the broom more firmly with his trembling hands; he even stands still and stops
sweeping so as to direct his full attention to the ownership of the broom. The assistant
doesn't actually plead in words, for he is afraid of Blumfeld, who is ostensibly doing his
accounts; moreover, ordinary speech is useless, since the servant can be made to hear
only by excessive shouting. So at first the assistant tugs the servant by the sleeve. The
servant knows, of course, what it is about, glowers at the assistant, shakes his head,
and pulls the broom nearer, up to his chest. Whereupon the assistant folds his hands
and pleads. Actually, he has no hope of achieving anything by pleading, but the
pleading amuses him and so he pleads. The other assistant follows the goings-on with
low laughter and seems to think, heaven knows why, that Blumfeld can't hear him.
The pleading makes not the slightest impression on the servant, who turns around and
thinks he can safely use the broom again. The assistant, however, has skipped after
him on tiptoe and, rubbing his hands together imploringly, now pleads from another
side. This turning of the one and skipping of the other is repeated several times.
Finally the servant feels cut off from all sides and realizes something which, had he
been slightly less stupid, he might have realized from the beginning -- that he will be
tired out long before the assistant. So, looking for help elsewhere, he wags his finger at
the assistant and points at Blumfeld, suggesting that he will lodge a complaint if the
assistant refuses to desist. The assistant realizes that if he is to get the broom at all he'll
have to hurry, so he impudently makes a grab for it. An involuntary scream from the

by taking a step back and dragging it after him. But now the assistant is up in arms:
with open mouth and flashing eyes he leaps forward, the servant tries to escape, but
his old legs wobble rather than run, the assistant tugs at the broom and though he
doesn't succeed in getting it he nevertheless causes it to drop and in this way it is lost
to the servant. Also apparently to the assistant for, the moment the broom falls, all
three, the two assistants and the servant, are paralyzed, for now Blumfeld is bound to
discover everything. And sure enough Blumfeld at his peephole glances up as though
taking in the situation only now. He stares at each one with a stern and searching eye,
even the broom on the floor does not escape his notice. Perhaps the silence has lasted
too long or perhaps the assistant can no longer suppress his desire to sweep, in any
case he bends down -- albeit very carefully, as though about to grab an animal rather
than a broom -- seizes it, passes it over the floor, but, when Blumfeld jumps up and
steps out of his cubicle, promptly casts it aside in alarm. "Both of you back to work!
And not another sound out of you!" shouts Blumfeld, and with an outstretched hand
he directs the two assistants back to their desks. They obey at once, but not
shamefaced or with lowered heads, rather they squeeze themselves stiffly past
Blumfeld, staring him straight in the eye as though trying in this way to stop him from
beating them. Yet they might have learned from experience that Blumfeld on principle
never beats anyone. But they are overapprehensive, and without any tact keep trying
to protect their real or imaginary rights.

*** END OF THE EBOOK ***
