*** START OF THE EBOOK ***

NOCHAPTERS
I HAVE COMPLETED the construction of my burrow and it seems to be
successful. All that can be seen from outside is a big hole; that, however, really leads
nowhere; if you take a few steps you strike against natural firm rock. I can make no
boast of having contrived this ruse intentionally; it is simply the remains of one of my
many abortive building attempts, but finally it seemed to me advisable to leave this
one hole without filling it in. True, some ruses are so subtle that they defeat
themselves, I know that better than anyone, and it is certainly a risk to draw attention
by this hole to the fact that there may be something in the vicinity worth inquiring
into. But you do not know me if you think I am afraid, or that I built my burrow simply
out of fear. At a distance of some thousand paces from this hole lies, covered by a
movable layer of moss, the real entrance to the burrow; it is secured as safely as
anything in this world can be secured; yet someone could step on the moss or break
through it, and then my burrow would lie open, and anybody who liked -- please note,
however, that quite uncommon abilities would also be required -- could make his way
in and destroy everything for good. I know that very well, and even now, at the zenith
of my life, I can scarcely pass an hour in complete tranquility; at that one point in the
dark moss I am vulnerable, and in my dreams I often see a greedy muzzle sniffing
around it persistently. It will be objected that I could quite well have filled in the
entrance too, with a thin layer of hard earth on top and with loose soil further down,
so that it would not cost me much trouble to dig my way out again whenever I liked.
But that plan is impossible; prudence itself demands that I should have a way of
leaving at a moment's notice if necessary, prudence itself demands, as alas! so often, to
risk one's life. All this involves very laborious calculation, and the sheer pleasure of the
mind in its own keenness is often the sole reason why one keeps it up. I must have a
way of leaving at a moment's notice, for, despite all my vigilance, may I not be attacked
from some quite unexpected quarter? I live in peace in the inmost chamber of my

house, and meanwhile the enemy may be burrowing his way slowly and stealthily
straight toward me. I do not say that he has a better scent than I; probably he knows as
little about me as I of him. But there are insatiable robbers who burrow blindly
through the ground, and to whom the very size of my house gives the hope of hitting
by chance on some of its far-flung passages. I certainly have the advantage of being in
my own house and knowing all the passages and how they run. A robber may very
easily become my victim and a succulent one too. But I am growing old; I am not as
strong as many others, and my enemies are countless; it could well happen that in
flying from one enemy I might run into the jaws of another. Anything might happen!
In any case I must have the confident knowledge that somewhere there is an exit easy
to reach and quite free, where I have to do nothing whatever to get out, so that I might
never -- Heaven shield us! -- suddenly feel the teeth of the pursuer in my flank while I
am desperately burrowing away, even if it is at loose easy soil. And it is not only by
external enemies that I am threatened. There are also enemies in the bowels of the
earth. I have never seen them, but legend tells of them and I firmly believe in them.
They are creatures of the inner earth; not even legend can describe them. Their very
victims can scarcely have seen them; they come, you hear the scratching of their claws
just under you in the ground, which is their element, and already you are lost. Here it
is of no avail to console yourself with the thought that you are in your own house; far
rather are you in theirs. Not even my exit could save me from them; indeed in all
probability it would not save me in any case, but rather betray me; yet it is a hope, and
I cannot live without it. Apart from this main exit I am also connected with the outer
world by quite narrow, tolerably safe passages which provide me with good fresh air to
breathe. They are the work of the field mice. I have made judicious use of them,
transforming them into an organic part of my burrow. They also give me the
possibility of scenting things from afar, and thus serve as a protection. All sorts of
small fry, too, come running through them, and I devour these; so I can have a certain
amount of subterranean hunting, sufficient for a modest way of life, without leaving
my burrow at all; and that is naturally a great advantage.

But the most beautiful thing about my burrow is the stillness. Of course, that is
deceptive. At any moment it may be shattered and then all will be over. For the time
being, however, the silence is still with me. For hours I can stroll through my passages
and hear nothing except the rustling of some little creature, which I immediately
reduce to silence between my jaws, or the pattering of soil, which draws my attention
to the need for repair; otherwise all is still. The fragrance of the woods floats in; the
place feels both warm and cool. Sometimes I lie down and roll about in the passage
with pure joy. When autumn sets in, to possess a burrow like mine, and a roof over
your head, is great good fortune for anyone getting on in years. Every hundred yards I
have widened the passages into little round cells; there I can curl myself up in comfort
and lie warm. There I sleep the sweet sleep of tranquility, of satisfied desire, of
achieved ambition; for I possess a house. I do not know whether it is a habit that still
persists from former days, or whether the perils even of this house of mine are great
enough to awaken me; but invariably every now and then I start up out of profound
sleep and listen, listen into the stillness which reigns here unchanged day and night,
smile contentedly, and then sink with loosened limbs into still profounder sleep. Poor
homeless wanderers in the roads and woods, creeping for warmth into a heap of leaves
or a herd of their comrades, delivered to all the perils of heaven and earth! I lie here in
a room secured on every side -- there are more than fifty such rooms in my burrow -and pass as much of my time as I choose between dozing and unconscious sleep.
Not quite in the center of the burrow, carefully chosen to serve as a refuge in
case of extreme danger from siege if not from immediate pursuit, lies the chief cell.
While all the rest of the burrow is the outcome rather of intense intellectual than of
physical labor, this Castle Keep was fashioned by the most arduous labor of my whole
body. Several times, in the despair brought on by physical exhaustion, I was on the
point of giving up the whole business, flung myself down panting and cursed the
burrow, dragged myself outside and left the place lying open to all the world. I could
afford to do that, for I had no longer any wish to return to it, until at last, after four
hours or days, back I went repentantly, and when I saw that the burrow was unharmed

I could almost have raised a hymn of thanksgiving, and in sincere gladness of heart
started on the work anew. My labors on the Castle Keep were also made harder, and
unnecessarily so (unnecessarily in that the burrow derived no real benefit from those
labors), by the fact that just at the place where, according to my calculations, the
Castle Keep should be, the soil was very loose and sandy and had literally to be
hammered and pounded into a firm state to serve as a wall for the beautifully vaulted
chamber. But for such tasks the only tool I possess is my forehead. So I had to run with
my forehead thousands and thousands of times, for whole days and nights, against the
ground, and I was glad when the blood came, for that was a proof that the walls were
beginning to harden; and in that way, as everybody must admit, I richly paid for my
Castle Keep.
In the Castle Keep I assemble my stores; everything over and above my daily
wants that I capture inside the burrow, and everything I bring back with me from my
hunting expeditions outside, I pile up here. The place is so spacious that food for half a
year scarcely fills it. Consequently I can divide up my stores, walk about among them,
play with them, enjoy their plenty and their various smells, and reckon up exactly how
much they represent. That done, I can always arrange accordingly, and make my
calculations and hunting plans for the future, taking into account the season of the
year. There are times when I am so well provided for that in my indifference to food I
never even touch the smaller fry that scuttle about the burrow, which, however, is
probably imprudent of me. My constant preoccupation with defensive measures
involves a frequent alteration or modification, though within narrow limits, of my
views on how the building can best be organized for that end. Then it sometimes
seems risky to make the Castle Keep the basis of defense; the ramifications of the
burrow present me with manifold possibilities, and it seems more in accordance with
prudence to divide up my stores somewhat, and put part of them in certain of the
smaller rooms; thereupon I mark off every third room, let us say, as a reserve
storeroom, or every fourth room as a main and every second as an auxiliary
storeroom, and so forth. Or I ignore certain passages altogether and store no food in

them, so as to throw any enemy off the scent, or I choose quite at random a very few
rooms according to their distance from the main exit. Each of these new plans involves
of course heavy work; I have to make my calculations and then carry my stores to their
new places. True, I can do that at my leisure and without any hurry, and it is not at all
unpleasant to carry such good food in your jaws, to lie down and rest whenever you
like, and to nibble an occasional tasty tidbit. But it is not so pleasant when, as
sometimes happens, you suddenly fancy, starting up from your sleep, that the present
distribution of your stores is completely and totally wrong, might lead to great
dangers, and must be set right at once, no matter how tired or sleepy you may be; then
I rush, then I fly, then I have no time for calculation; and although I was about to
execute a perfectly new, perfectly exact plan, I now seize whatever my teeth hit upon
and drag it or carry it away, sighing, groaning, stumbling, and even the most
haphazard change in the present situation, which seems so terribly dangerous, can
satisfy me. Until little by little full wakefulness sobers me, and I can hardly understand
my panic haste, breathe in deeply the tranquility of my house, which I myself have
disturbed, return to my resting place, fall asleep at once in a new-won exhaustion, and
on awakening find hanging from my jaws, say, a rat, as indubitable proof of night
labors which already seem almost unreal. Then again there are times when the
storing of all my food in one place seems the best plan of all. Of what use to me could
my stores in the smaller rooms be, how much could I store there in any case? And
whatever I put there would block the passage, and be a greater hindrance than help to
me if I were pursued and had to fly. Besides, it is stupid but true that one's self-conceit
suffers if one cannot see all one's stores together, and so at one glance know how much
one possesses. And in dividing up my food in those various ways might not a great deal
get lost? I can't be always scouring through all my passages and cross-passages so as to
make sure that everything is in order. The idea of dividing up my stores is of course a
good one, but only if one had several rooms similar to my Castle Keep. Several such
rooms! Indeed! And who is to build them? In any case, they could not be worked into
the general plan of my burrow at this late stage. But I will admit that that is a fault in
my burrow; it is always a fault to have only one piece of anything. And I confess too

that during the whole time I was constructing the burrow a vague idea that I should
have more such cells stirred in my mind, vaguely, yet clearly enough if I had only
welcomed it; I did not yield to it, I felt too feeble for the enormous labor it would
involve, more, I felt too feeble even to admit to myself the necessity for that labor, and
comforted myself as best I could with the vague hope that a building which in any
other case would clearly be inadequate, would in my own unique, exceptional, favored
case suffice, presumably because providence was interested in the preservation of my
forehead, that unique instrument. So I have only one Castle Keep, but my dark
premonitions that one would not suffice have faded. However that may be, I must
content myself with the one big chamber, the smaller ones are simply no substitute for
it, and so, when this conviction has grown on me, I begin once more to haul all my
stores back from them to the Castle Keep. For some time afterwards I find a certain
comfort in having all the passages and rooms free, in seeing my stores growing in the
Castle Keep and emitting their variegated and mingled smells, each of which delights
me in its own fashion, and every one of which I can distinguish even at a distance, as
far as the very remotest passages. Then I usually enjoy periods of particular tranquility,
in which I change my sleeping place by stages, always working in toward the center of
the burrow, always steeping myself more profoundly in the mingled smells, until at last
I can no longer restrain myself and one night rush into the Castle Keep, mightily fling
myself upon my stores, and glut myself with the best that I can seize until I am
completely gorged. Happy but dangerous hours; anyone who knew how to exploit
them could destroy me with ease and without any risk. Here too the absence of a
second or third large storeroom works to my detriment; for it is the single huge
accumulated mass of food that seduces me. I try to guard myself in various ways
against this danger; the distribution of my stores in the smaller rooms is really one of
these expedients; but unfortunately, like other such expedients, it leads through
renunciation to still greater greed, which, overruling my intelligence, makes me
arbitrarily alter my plans of defense to suit its ends.
To regain my composure after such lapses I make a practice of reviewing the

burrow, and after the necessary improvements have been carried out, frequently leave
it, though only for a short spell. Even at such moments the hardship of being without
it for a long time seems too punitive to me, yet I recognize clearly the need for
occasional short excursions. It is always with a certain solemnity that I approach the
exit again. During my spells of home life I avoid it, steer clear even of the outer
windings of the corridor that leads to it; besides, it is no easy job to wander about out
there, for I have contrived there a whole little maze of passages; it was there that I
began my burrow, at a time when I had no hope of ever completing it according to my
plans; I began, half in play, at that corner, and so my first joy in labor found riotous
satisfaction there in a labyrinthine burrow which at the time seemed to me the crown
of all burrows, but which I judge today, perhaps with more justice, to be too much of
an idle tour de force, not really worthy of the rest of the burrow, and though perhaps
theoretically brilliant -- here is my main entrance, I said in those days, ironically
addressing my invisible enemies and seeing them all already caught and stifled in the
outer labyrinth -- is in reality a flimsy piece of jugglery that would hardly withstand a
serious attack or the struggles of an enemy fighting for his life. Should I reconstruct
this part of my burrow? I keep on postponing the decision, and the labyrinth will
probably remain as it is. Apart from the sheer hard work that I should have to face, the
task would also be the most dangerous imaginable. When I began the burrow I could
work away at it in comparative peace of mind, the risk wasn't much greater than any
other risk; but to attempt that today would be to draw the whole world's attention, and
gratuitously, to my burrow; today the whole thing is impossible. I am almost glad of
that, for I still have a certain sentiment about this first achievement of mine. And if a
serious attack were attempted, what pattern of entrance at all would be likely to save
me? An entrance can deceive, can lead astray, can give the attacker no end of worry,
and the present one too can do that at a pinch. But a really serious attack has to be met
by an instantaneous mobilization of all the resources in the burrow and all the forces
of my body and soul -- that is self-evident. So this entrance can very well remain where
it is. The burrow has so many unavoidable defects imposed by natural causes that it
can surely stand this one defect for which I am responsible, and which I recognize as a

defect, even if only after the event. In spite of that, however, I do not deny that this
fault worries me from time to time, indeed always. If on my customary rounds I avoid
this part of the burrow, the fundamental reason is that the sight of it is painful to me,
because I don't want to be perpetually reminded of a defect in my house, even if that
defect is only too disturbingly present in my mind. Let it continue to exist ineradicably
at the entrance; I can at least refuse to look at it as long as that is possible. If I merely
walk in the direction of the entrance, even though I may be separated from it by
several passages and rooms, I find myself sensing an atmosphere of great danger,
actually as if my hair were growing thin and in a moment might fly off and leave me
bare and shivering, exposed to the howls of my enemies. Yes, the mere thought of the
door itself, the end of the domestic protection, brings such feelings with it, yet it is the
labyrinth leading up to it that torments me most of all. Sometimes I dream, that I have
reconstructed it, transformed it completely, quickly, in a night, with a giant's strength,
nobody having noticed, and now it is impregnable; the nights in which such dreams
come to me are the sweetest I know, tears of joy and deliverance still glisten on my
beard when I awaken.
So I must thread the tormenting complications of this labyrinth physically as
well as mentally whenever I go out, and I am both exasperated and touched when, as
sometimes happens, I lose myself for a moment in my own maze, and the work of my
hands seems to be still doing its best to prove its sufficiency to me, its maker, whose
final judgment has long since been passed on it. But then I find myself beneath the
mossy covering, which has been left untouched for so long -- for I stay for long spells
in my house -- that it has grown fast to the soil around it, and now only a little push
with my head is needed and I am in the upper world. For a long time I do not dare to
make that little movement, and if it were not that I would have to traverse the
labyrinth once more, I would certainly leave the matter for the time being and turn
back again. Just think. Your house is protected and self-sufficient. You live in peace,
warm, well nourished, master, sole master of all your manifold passages and rooms,
and all this you are prepared -- not to give up, of course -- but to risk it, so to speak;

you nurse the confident hope, certainly, that you will regain it; yet is it not a
dangerous, a far too dangerous stake that you are playing for? Can there be any
reasonable grounds for such a step? No, for such acts as these there can be no
reasonable grounds. But all the same, I then cautiously raise the trap door and slip
outside, let it softly fall back again, and fly as fast as I can from the treacherous spot.
Yet I am not really free. True, I am no longer confined by narrow passages, but
hunt through the open woods, and feel new powers awakening in my body for which
there was no room, as it were, in the burrow, not even in the Castle Keep, though it
had been ten times as big. The food too is better up here; though hunting is more
difficult, success more rare, the results are more valuable from every point of view; I
do not deny all this; I appreciate it and take advantage of it at least as fully as anyone
else, and probably more fully, for I do not hunt like a vagrant out of mere idleness or
desperation, but calmly and methodically. Also I am not permanently doomed to this
free life, for I know that my term is measured, that I do not have to hunt here forever,
and that, whenever I am weary of this life and wish to leave it, Someone, whose
invitation I shall not be able to withstand, will, so to speak, summon me to him. And
so I can pass my time here quite without care and in complete enjoyment, or rather I
could, and yet I cannot. My burrow takes up too much of my thoughts. I fled from the
entrance fast enough, but soon I am back at it again. I seek out a good hiding place and
keep watch on the entrance of my house -- this time from outside -- for whole days
and nights. Call it foolish if you like; it gives me infinite pleasure and reassures me. At
such times it is as if I were not so much looking at my house as at myself sleeping, and
had the joy of being in a profound slumber and simultaneously of keeping vigilant
guard over myself. I am privileged, as it were, not only to dream about the specters of
the night in all the helplessness and blind trust of sleep, but also at the same time to
confront them in actuality with the calm judgment of the fully awake. And strangely
enough I discover that my situation is not so bad as I had often thought, and will
probably think again when I return to my house. In this connection -- it may be in
others too, but in this one especially -- these excursions of mine are truly

indispensable. Carefully as I have chosen an out-of-the-way place for my door, the
traffic that passes it is nevertheless, if one takes a week's observation, very great; but so
it is, no doubt, in all inhabited regions, and probably it is actually better to hazard the
risks of dense traffic, whose very impetus carries it past, than to be delivered in
complete solitude to the first persistently searching intruder. Here enemies are
numerous and their allies and accomplices still more numerous, but they fight one
another, and while thus employed rush past my burrow without noticing it. In all my
time I have never seen anyone investigating the actual door of my house, which is
fortunate both for me and for him, for I would certainly have launched myself at his
throat, forgetting everything else in my anxiety for the burrow. True, creatures come,
in whose vicinity I dare not remain, and from whom I have to fly as soon as I scent
them in the distance; on their attitude to the burrow I really can't pronounce with
certainty, but it is at least a reassurance that when I presently return I never find any of
them there, and the entrance is undamaged. There have been happy periods in which I
could almost assure myself that the enmity of the world toward me had ceased or been
assuaged, or that the strength of the burrow had raised me above the destructive
struggle of former times. The burrow has probably protected me in more ways than I
thought or dared think while I was inside it. This fancy used to have such a hold over
me that sometimes I have been seized by the childish desire never to return to the
burrow again, but to settle down somewhere close to the entrance, to pass my life
watching the entrance, and gloat perpetually upon the reflection -- and in that find my
happiness -- how steadfast a protection my burrow would be if I were inside it. Well,
one is soon roughly awakened from childish dreams. What does this protection which
I am looking at here from the outside amount to after all? Dare I estimate the danger
which I run inside the burrow from observations which I make when outside? Can my
enemies, to begin with, have any proper awareness of me if I am not in my burrow? A
certain awareness of me they certainly have, but not full awareness. And is not that full
awareness the real definition of a state of danger? So the experiments I attempt here
are only half-experiments or even less, calculated merely to reassure my fears and by
giving me false reassurance to lay me open to great perils. No, I do not watch over my

own sleep, as I imagined; rather it is I who sleep, while the destroyer watches. Perhaps
he is one of those who pass the entrance without seeming to notice it, concerned
merely to ascertain, just like myself, that the door is still untouched and waits for their
attack, and only pass because they know that the master of the house is out, or because
they are quite aware that he is guilelessly lying on the watch in the bushes close by.
And I leave my post of observation and find I have had enough of this outside life; I
feel that there is nothing more that I can learn here, either now or at any time. And I
long to say a last goodbye to everything up here, to go down into my burrow never to
return again, let things take their course, and not try to retard them with my profitless
vigils. But spoiled by seeing for such a long time everything that happened around the
entrance, I find great difficulty in summoning the resolution to carry out the actual
descent, which might easily draw anyone's attention, and without knowing what is
happening behind my back and behind the door after it is fastened. I take advantage of
stormy nights to get over the necessary preliminaries, and quickly bundle in my spoil;
that seems to have come off, but whether it has really come off will only be known
when I myself have made the descent; it will be known, but not by me, or by me, but
too late. So I give up the attempt and do not make the descent. I dig an experimental
burrow, naturally at a good distance from the real entrance, a burrow just as long as
myself, and seal it also with a covering of moss. I creep into my hole, close it after me,
wait patiently, keep vigil for long or short spells, and at various hours of the day, then
fling off the moss, issue from my hole, and summarize my observations. These are
extremely heterogeneous, and both good and bad; but I have never been able to
discover a universal principle or an infallible method of descent. In consequence of all
this I have not yet summoned the resolution to make my actual descent, and am
thrown into despair at the necessity of doing it soon. I almost screw myself to the
point of deciding to emigrate to distant parts and take up my old comfortless life
again, which had no security whatever, but was one indiscriminate succession of
perils, yet in consequence prevented one from perceiving and fearing particular perils,
as I am constantly reminded by comparing my secure burrow with ordinary life.
Certainly such a decision would be an arrant piece of folly, produced simply by living

too long in senseless freedom; the burrow is still mine, I have only to take a single step
and I am safe. And I tear myself free from all my doubts and by broad daylight rush to
the door, quite resolved to raise it now; but I cannot, I rush past it and fling myself into
a thorn bush, deliberately, as a punishment, a punishment for some sin I do not know
of. Then, at the last moment, I am forced to admit to myself that I was right after all,
and that it was really impossible to go down into the burrow without exposing the
thing I love best, for a little while at least, to all my enemies, on the ground, in the
trees, in the air. And the danger is by no means a fanciful one, but very real. It need
not be any particular enemy that is provoked to pursue me, it may very well be some
chance innocent little creature, some disgusting little beast which follows me out of
curiosity, and thus, without knowing it, becomes the leader of all the world against me;
nor need it be even that, it may be -- and that would be just as bad, indeed in some
respects worse -- it may be someone of my own kind, a connoisseur and prizer of
burrows, a hermit, a lover of peace, but all the same a filthy scoundrel who wishes to
be housed where he has not built. If he were actually to arrive now, if in his obscene
lust he were to discover the entrance and set about working at it, lifting the moss; if he
were actually to succeed, if he were actually to wriggle his way in in my stead, until
only his hindquarters still showed; if all this were actually to happen, so that at last,
casting all prudence to the winds, I might in my blind rage leap on him, maul him, tear
the flesh from his bones, destroy him, drink his blood, and fling his corpse among the
rest of my spoil, but above all -- that is the main thing -- were at last back in my
burrow once more, I would have it in my heart to greet the labyrinth itself with
rapture; but first I would draw the moss covering over me, and I would want to rest, it
seems to me, for all the remainder of my life. But nobody comes and I am left to my
own resources. Perpetually obsessed by the sheer difficulty of the attempt, I lose much
of my timidity, I no longer attempt even to appear to avoid the entrance, but make a
hobby of prowling around it; by now it is almost as if I were the enemy spying out a
suitable opportunity for successfully breaking in. If I only had someone I could trust to
keep watch at post of observation; then of course I could descend in perfect peace of
mind. I would make an agreement with this trusty confederate of mine that he would

keep a careful note of the state of things during my descent and for quite a long time
afterwards, and if he saw any sign of danger knock on the moss covring, and if he saw
nothing do nothing. With that a clean sweep would be made of all my fears, no residue
would be left, or at most my confidant. For would he not demand some counterservice from me; would he not at least want to see the burrow? That in itself, to let
anyone freely into my burrow, would be exquisitely painful to me. I built it for myself,
not for visitors, and I think I would refuse to admit him, not even though he alone
made it possible for me to get into the burrow would I let him in. But I simply could
not admit him, for either I must let him go in first by himself, which is simply
unimaginable, or we must both descend at the same time, in which case the advantage
I am supposed to derive from him, that of being kept watch over, would be lost. And
what trust can I really put in him? Can I trust one whom I have had under my eyes just
as fully when I can't see him, and the moss covering separates us? It is comparatively
easy to trust anyone if you are supervising him or at least can supervise him; perhaps it
is possible even to trust someone at a distance; but completely to trust someone
outside the burrow when you are inside the burrow, that is, in a different world, that, it
seems to me, is impossible. But such considerations are not in the least necessary; the
mere reflection is enough that during or after my descent one of the countless
accidents of existence might prevent my confidant from fulfilling his duty, and what
incalculable results might not the smallest accident of that kind have for me? No, if
one takes it by and large, I have no right to complain that I am alone and have nobody
that I can trust. I certainly lose nothing by that and probably spare myself trouble. I
can only trust myself and my burrow. I should have thought of that before and taken
measures to meet the difficulty that worries me so much now. When I began the
burrow it would at least have been partly possible. I should have so constructed the
first passage that it had two entrances at a moderate distance from each other, so that
after descending through the one entrance with that slowness which is unavoidable, I
might rush at once through the passage to the second entrance, slightly raise the moss
covering, which would be so arranged as to make that easy, and from there keep watch
on the position for several days and nights. That would have been the only right way of

doing it. True, the two entrances would double the risk, but that consideration need
not delay me, for one of the entrances, serving merely as a post of observation, could
be quite narrow. And with that I lose myself in a maze of technical speculations, I
begin once more to dream my dream of a completely perfect burrow, and that
somewhat calms me; with closed eyes I behold with delight perfect or almost perfect
structural devices for enabling me to slip out and in unobserved. While I lie there
thinking such things I admire these devices very greatly, but only as technical
achievements, not as real advantages; for this freedom to slip out and in at will, what
does it amount to? It is the mark of a restless nature, of inner uncertainty, disreputable
desires, evil propensities that seem still worse when one thinks of the burrow, which is
there at one's hand and can flood one with peace if one only remains quite open and
receptive to it. For the present, however, I am outside it seeking some possibility of
returning, and for that the necessary technical devices would be very desirable. But
perhaps not so very desirable after all. Is it not a very grave injustice to the burrow to
regard it in moments of nervous panic as a mere hole into which one can creep and be
safe? Certainly it is a hole among other things, and a safe one, or should be, and when I
picture myself in the midst of danger, then I insist with clenched teeth and all my will
that the burrow should be nothing but a hole set apart to save me, and that it should
fufill that clearly defined function with the greatest possible efficiency, and I am ready
to absolve it from every other duty. Now the truth of the matter -- and one has no eye
for that in times of great peril, and only by a great effort even in times when danger is
threatening -- is that in reality the burrow does provide a considerable degree of
security, but by no means enough, for is one ever free from anxieties inside it? These
anxieties are different from ordinary ones, prouder, richer in content, often long
repressed, but in their destructive effects they are perhaps much the same as the
anxieties that existence in the outer world gives rise to. Had I constructed the burrow
exclusively to assure my safety I would not have been disappointed, it is true;
nevertheless the relation between the enormous labor involved and the actual security
it would provide, at least insofar as I could feel it and profit by it, would not have been
in my favor. It is extremely painful to have to admit such things to oneself, but one is

forced to do it, confronted by that entrance over there which now literally locks and
bars itself against me, the builder and possessor. Yet the burrow is not a mere hole for
taking refuge in. When I stand in the Castle Keep surrounded by my piled-up stores,
surveying the ten passages which begin there, raised and sunken passages, vertical and
rounded passages, wide and narrow passages, as the general plan dictates, and all alike
still and empty, ready by their various routes to conduct me to all the other rooms,
which are also still and empty -- then all thought of mere safety is far from my mind,
then I know that here is my castle, which I have wrested from the refractory soil with
tooth and claw, with pounding and hammering blows, my castle which can never
belong to anyone else, and is so essentially mine that I can calmly accept in it even my
enemy's mortal stroke at the final hour, for my blood will ebb away here in my own
soil and not be lost. And what but that is the meaning of the blissful hours which I
pass, now peacefully slumbering, now happily keeping watch, in these passages, these
passages which suit me so well, where one can stretch oneself out in comfort, roll
about in childish delight, lie and dream, or sink into blissful sleep. And the smaller
rooms, each familiar to me, so familiar that in spite of their complete similarity I can
clearly distinguish one from the other with my eyes shut by the mere feel of the wall:
they enclose me more peacefully and warmly than a bird is enclosed in its nest. And
all, all still and empty.
But if that is the case, why do I hang back? Why do I dread the thought of the
intruding enemy more than the possibility of never seeing my burrow again? Well, the
latter alternative is fortunately an impossibility; there is no need for me even to take
thought to know what the burrow means to me; I and the burrow belong so
indissolubly together that in spite of all my fears I could make myself quite
comfortable out here, and not even need to overcome my repugnance and open the
door; I could be quite content to wait here passively, for nothing can part us for long,
and somehow or other I shall quite certainly find myself in my burrow again. But on
the other hand how much time may pass before then, and how many things may
happen in that time, up here no less than down there? And it lies with me solely to

curtail that interval and to do what is necessary at once.
And then, too exhausted to be any longer capable of thought, my head hanging,
my legs trembling with fatigue, half asleep, feeling my way rather than walking, I
approach the entrance, slowly raise the moss covering, slowly descend, leaving the
door open in my distraction for a needlessly long time, and presently remember my
omission, and get out again to make it good -- but what need was there to get out for
that? All that was needed was to draw to the moss covering; right; so I creep in again
and now at last draw to the moss covering. Only in this state, and in this state alone,
can I achieve my descent. So at last I lie down beneath the moss on the top of my
bloodstained spoil and can now enjoy my longed-for sleep. Nothing disturbs me, no
one has tracked me down, above the moss everything seems to be quiet thus far at
least, but even if all were not quiet I question whether I could stop to keep watch now;
I have changed my place, I have left the upper world and am in my burrow, and I feel
its effect at once. It is a new world, endowing me with new powers, and what I felt as
fatigue up there is no longer that here. I have returned from a journey dog-tired with
my wanderings, but the sight of the old house, the thought of all the things that are
waiting to be done, the necessity at least to cast a glance at all the rooms, but above all
to make my way immediately to the Castle Keep; all this transforms my fatigue into
ardent zeal; it is as though at the moment when I set foot in the burrow I had wakened
from a long and profound sleep. My first task is a very laborious one and requires all
my attention; I mean getting my spoil through the narrow and thin-walled passages of
the labyrinth. I shove with all my might, and the work gets done too, but far too slowly
for me; to hasten it I drag part of my flesh supply back again and push my way over it
and through it; now I have only a portion of my spoil before me and it is easier to make
progress; but my road is so blocked by all this flesh in these narrow passages, through
which it is not always easy for me to make my way even when I am alone, that I could
quite easily smother among my own stores; sometimes I can only rescue myself from
their pressure by eating and drinking a clear space for myself. But the work of
transport is successful, I finish it in quite a reasonable time, the labyrinth is behind me,

I reach an ordinary passage and breathe freely, push my spoil through a
communication passage into a main passage expressly designed for the purpose, a
passage sloping down steeply to the Castle Keep. What is left to be done is not really
work at all; my whole load rolls and flows down the passage almost of itself. The Castle
Keep at last! At last I can dare to rest. Everything is unchanged, no great mishap seems
to have occurred, the few little defects that I note at a first glance can soon be repaired;
first, however, I must go my long round of all the passages, but that is no hardship,
that is merely to commune again with friends, as I often did in the old days or -- I am
not so very old yet, but my memory of many things is already quite confused -- as I
often did, or as I have often heard that it was done. Now I begin with the second
passage, purposefully slow, now that I have seen the Castle Keep I have endless time -inside the burrow I always have endless time -- for everything I do there is good and
important and satisfies me somehow. I begin with the second passage, but break off in
the middle and turn into the third passage and let it take me back again to the Castle
Keep, and now of course I have to begin at the second passage once more, and so I
play with my task and lengthen it out and smile to myself and enjoy myself and
become quite dazed with all the work in front of me, but never think of turning aside
from it. It is for your sake, ye passages and rooms, and you, Castle Keep, above all, that
I have come back, counting my own life as nothing in the balance, after stupidly
trembling for it for so long, and postponing my return to you. What do I care for
danger now that I am with you? You belong to me, I to you, we are united; what can
harm us? What if my foes should be assembling even now up above there and their
muzzles be preparing to break through the moss? And with its silence and emptiness
the burrow answers me, confirming my words. But now a feeling of lassitude
overcomes me and in some favorite room I curl myself up tentatively, I have not yet
surveyed everything by a long way, though still resolved to examine everything to the
very end; I have no intention of sleeping here, I have merely yielded to the temptation
of making myself comfortable and pretending I want to sleep, I merely wish to find out
if this is as good a place for sleeping as it used to be. It is, but it is a better place for
sleep than for waking, and I remain lying where I am in deep slumber.

I must have slept for a long time. I was only wakened when I had reached the
last light sleep which dissolves of itself, and it must have been very light, for it was an
almost inaudible whistling noise that wakened me. I recognized what it was
immediately; the small fry, whom I had allowed far too much latitude, had burrowed a
new channel somewhere during my absence, this channel must have chanced to
intersect an older one, the air was caught there, and that produced the whistling noise.
What an indefatigably busy lot these small fry are, and what a nuisance their diligence
can be! First I shall have to listen at the walls of my passages and locate the place of
disturbance by experimental excavations, and only then will I be able to get rid of the
noise. However, this new channel may be quite welcome as a further means of
ventilation, if it can be fitted into the plan of the burrow. But after this I shall keep a
much sharper eye on the small fry than I used to; I shall spare none of them.
As I have a good deal of experience in investigations of this kind the work
probably will not take me long and I can start upon it at once; there are other jobs
awaiting me, it is true, but this is the most urgent. I must have silence in my passages.
This noise, however, is a comparatively innocent one; I did not hear it at all when I
first arrived, although it must certainly have been there; I must first feel quite at home
before I could hear it; it is, so to speak, audible only to the ear of the householder. And
it is not even constant, as such noises usually are; there are long pauses, obviously
caused by stoppages of the current of air. I start on my investigations, but I can't find
the right place to begin at, and though I cut a few trenches I do it at random; naturally
that has no effect, and the hard work of digging and the still harder work of filling the
trenches up again and beating the earth firm is so much labor lost. I don't seem to be
getting any nearer to the place where the noise is, it goes on always on the same thin
note, with regular pauses, now a sort of whistling, but again like a kind of piping. Now
I could leave it to itself for the time being; it is very disturbing, certainly, but there can
hardly be any doubt that its origin is what I took it to be at first; so it can scarcely
become louder, on the contrary, such noises may quite well -- though until now I have
never had to wait so long for that to happen -- may quite well vanish of themselves in

the course of time through the continued labors of these little burrowers; and apart
from that, often chance itself puts one on the track of the disturbance, where
systematic investigation has failed for a long time. In such ways I comfort myself, and
resolve simply to continue my tour of the passages, and visit the rooms, many of which
I have not even seen yet since my return, and enjoy myself contemplating the Castle
Keep now and then between times; but my anxiety will not let me, and I must go on
with my search. These little creatures take up much, far too much, time that could be
better employed. In such cases as the present it is usually the technical problem that
attracts me; for example, from the noise, which my ear can distinguish in all its finest
shades, so that it has a perfectly clear outline to me, I deduce its cause, and now I am
on fire to discover whether my conclusion is valid. And with good reason, for as long
as that is not established I cannot feel safe, even if it were merely a matter of
discovering where a grain of sand that had fallen from one of the walls had rolled to.
And a noise such as this is by no means a trifling matter, regarded from that angle. But
whether trifling or important, I can find nothing, no matter how hard I search, or it
may be that I find too much. This had to happen just in my favorite room, I think to
myself, and I walk a fair distance away from it, almost halfway along the passage
leading to the next room; I do this more as a joke, pretending to myself that my
favorite room is not alone to blame, but that there are disturbances elsewhere as well,
and with a smile on my face I begin to listen; but soon I stop smiling, for, right enough,
the same whistling meets me here too. It is really nothing to worry about; sometimes I
think that nobody but myself would hear it; it is true, I hear it now more and more
distinctly, for my ear has grown keener through practice; though in reality it is exactly
the same noise wherever I may hear it, as I have convinced myself by comparing my
impressions. Nor is it growing louder; I recognize this when I listen in the middle of
the passage instead of pressing my ear against the wall. Then it is only with an effort,
indeed with great intentness, that I can more guess at than hear the merest trace of a
noise now and then. But it is this very uniformity of the noise everywhere that disturbs
me most, for it cannot be made to agree with my original assumption. Had I rightly
divined the cause of the noise, then it must have issued with greatest force from some

given place, which it would be my task to discover, and after that have grown fainter
and fainter. But if my hypothesis does not meet the case, what can the explanation be?
There still remains the possibility that there are two noises, that up to now I have been
listening at a good distance from the two centers, and that while its noise increases,
when I draw near to one of them, the total result remains approximately the same for
the ear in consequence of the lessening volume of sound from the other center.
Already I have almost fancied sometimes, when I have listened carefully, that I could
distinguish, if very indistinctly, differences of tone which support this new assumption.
In any case I must extend my sphere of investigation much farther than I have done.
Accordingly I descend the passage to the Castle Keep and begin to listen there.
Strange, the same noise there too. Now it is a noise produced by the burrowing of
some species of small fry who have infamously exploited my absence; in any case they
have no intention of doing me harm, they are simply busied with their own work, and
so long as no obstacle comes in their way they will keep on in the direction they have
taken: I know all this, yet that they should have dared to approach the very Castle
Keep itself is incomprehensible to me and fills me with agitation, and confuses the
faculties which I need so urgently for the work before me. Here I have no wish to
discover whether it is the unusual depth at which the Castle Keep lies, or its great
extent and correspondingly powerful air suction, calculated to scare burrowing
creatures away, or the mere fact that it is the Castle Keep, that by some channel or
other has penetrated to their dull minds. In any case, I have never noticed any sign of
burrowing in the walls of the Castle Keep until now. Crowds of little beasts have come
here, it is true, attracted by the powerful smells; here I have had a constant hunting
ground, but my quarry has always burrowed a way through in the upper passages, and
come running down here, somewhat fearfully, but unable to withstand such a
temptation. But now, it seems, they are burrowing in all the passages. If I had only
carried out the best of the grand plans I thought out in my youth and early manhood,
or rather, if I had only had the strength to carry them out, for there would have been
no lack of will. One of these favorite plans of mine was to isolate the Castle Keep from
its surroundings, that is to say, to restrict the thickness of its walls to about my own

height, and leave a free space of about the same width all around the Castle Keep,
except for a narrow foundation, which unfortunately would have to be left to bear up
the whole. I had always pictured this free space, and not without reason, as the
loveliest imaginable haunt. What a joy to lie pressed against the rounded outer wall,
pull oneself up, let oneself slide down again, miss one's footing and find oneself on
firm earth, and play all those games literally upon the Castle Keep and not inside it; to
avoid the Castle Keep, to rest one's eyes from it whenever one wanted, to postpone the
joy of seeing it until later and yet not have to do without it, but literally hold it safe
between one's claws, a thing that is impossible if you have only an ordinary open
entrance to it; but above all to be able to stand guard over it, and in that way to be so
completely compensated for renouncing the actual sight of it that, if one had to choose
between staying all one's life in the Castle Keep or in the free space outside it, one
would choose the latter, content to wander up and down there all one's days and keep
guard over the Castle Keep. Then there would be no noises in the walls, no insolent
burrowing up to the very Keep itself; then peace would be assured there and I would
be its guardian; then I would not have to listen with loathing to the burrowing of the
small fry, but with delight to something that I cannot hear now at all: the murmurous
silence of the Castle Keep.
But that beautiful dream is past and I must set to work, almost glad that now
my work has a direct connection with the Castle Keep, for that wings it. Certainly, as I
can see more and more clearly, I need all my energies for this task, which at first
seemed quite a trifling one. I listen now at the walls of the Castle Keep, and wherever I
listen, high or low, at the roof or the floor, at the entrance or in the corners,
everywhere, everywhere, I hear the same noise. And how much time, how much care
must be wasted in listening to that noise, with its regular pauses. One can, if one
wishes, find a tiny deceitful comfort in the fact that here in the Castle Keep, because of
its vastness, one hears nothing at all, as distinguished from the passages, when one
stands back from the walls. Simply as a rest and a means to regain my composure I
often make this experiment, listen intently and am overjoyed when I hear nothing. But

the question still remains, what can have happened? Confronted with this
phenomenon my original explanation completely falls to the ground. But I must also
reject other explanations which present themselves to me. One could assume, for
instance, that the noise I hear is simply that of the small fry themselves at their work.
But all my experience contradicts this; I cannot suddenly begin to hear now a thing
that I have never heard before though it was always there. My sensitiveness to
disturbances in the burrow has perhaps become greater with the years, yet my hearing
has by no means grown keener. It is of the very nature of small fry not to be heard.
Would I have tolerated them otherwise? Even at the risk of starvation I would have
exterminated them. But perhaps -- this idea now insinuates itself -- I am concerned
here with some animal unknown to me. That is possible. True, I have observed the life
down here long and carefully enough, but the world is full of diversity and is never
wanting in painful surprises. Yet it cannot be a single animal, it must be a whole
swarm that has suddenly fallen upon my domain, a huge swarm of little creatures,
which, as they are audible, must certainly be bigger than the small fry, but yet cannot
be very much bigger, for the sound of their labors is itself very faint. It may be, then, a
swarm of unknown creatures on their wanderings, who happen to be passing by my
way, who disturb me, but will presently cease to do so. So I could really wait for them
to pass, and need not put myself to the trouble of work that will be needless in the end.
Yet if these creatures are strangers, why is it that I never see any of them? I have
already dug a host of trenches, hoping to catch one of them, but I can find not a single
one. Then it occurs to me that they may be quite tiny creatures, far tinier than any I
am acquainted with, and that it is only the noise they make that is greater. Accordingly
I investigate the soil I have dug up, I cast the lumps into the air so that they break into
quite small particles, but the noisemakers are not among them. Slowly I come to
realize that by digging such small fortuitous trenches I achieve nothing; in doing that I
merely disfigure the walls of my burrow, scratching hastily here and there without
taking time to fill up the holes again; at many places already there are heaps of earth
which block my way and my view. Still, that is only a secondary worry; for now I can
neither wander about my house, nor review it, nor rest; often already I have fallen

asleep at my work in some hole or other, with one paw clutching the soil above me,
from which in a semistupor I have been trying to tear a lump. I intend now to alter my
methods. I shall dig a wide and carefully constructed trench in the direction of the
noise and not cease from digging until, independent of all theories, I find the real
cause of the noise. Then I shall eradicate it, if that is within my power, and if it is not,
at least I shall know the truth. That truth will bring me either peace or despair, but
whether the one or the other, it will be beyond doubt or question. This decision
strengthens me. All that I have done till now seems to me far too hasty; in the
excitement of my return, while I had not yet shaken myself free from the cares of the
upper world, and was not yet completely penetrated by the peace of the burrow, but
rather hypersensitive at having had to renounce it for such a long time, I was thrown
into complete confusion of mind by an unfamiliar noise. And what was it? A faint
whistling, audible only at long intervals, a mere nothing to which I don't say that one
could actually get used, for no one could get used to it, but which one could, without
actually doing anything about it at once, observe for a while; that is, listen every few
hours, let us say, and patiently register the results, instead of, as I had done, keeping
one's ear fixed to the wall and at every hint of noise tearing out a lump of earth, not
really hoping to find anything, but simply so as to do something to give expression to
one's inward agitation. All that will be changed now, I hope. And then, with furious
shut eyes, I have to admit to myself that I hope nothing of the kind, for I am still
trembling with agitation just as I was hours ago, and if my reason did not restrain me I
would probably like nothing better than to start stubbornly and defiantly digging,
simply for the sake of digging, at some place or other, whether I heard anything there
or not; almost like the small fry, who burrow either without any object at all or simply
because they eat the soil. My new and reasonable plan both tempts me and leaves me
cold. There is nothing in it to object to, I at least know of no objection; it is bound, so
far as I can see, to achieve my aim. And yet at bottom I do not believe in it; I believe in
it so little that I do not even fear the terrors which its success may well bring, I do not
believe even in a dreadful denouement; indeed it seems to me that I have been
thinking ever since the first appearance of the noise of such a methodical trench, and

have not begun upon it until now simply because I put no trust in it. In spite of that I
shall of course start on the trench; I have no other alternative; but I shall not start at
once, I shall postpone the task for a little while. If reason is to be reinstated on the
throne, it must be completely reinstated; I shall not rush blindly into my task. In any
case I shall first repair the damage that I have done to the burrow with my wild
digging; that will take a good long time, but it is necessary; if the new trench is really to
reach its goal it will probably be long, and if it should lead to nothing at all it will be
endless; in any case this task means a longish absence from the burrow, though an
absence by no means so painful as an absence in the upper world, for I can interrupt
my work whenever I like and pay a visit to my house; and even if I should not do that
the air of Castle Keep will be wafted to me and surround me while I work; nevertheless
it means leaving the burrow and surrendering myself to an uncertain fate, and
consequently I want to leave the burrow in good order behind me; it shall not be said
that I, who am fighting for its peace, have myself destroyed that peace without
reinstating it at once. So I begin by shoveling the soil back into the holes from which it
was taken, a kind of work I am familiar with, that I have done countless times almost
without regarding it as work, and at which, particularly as regards the final pressing
and smoothing down -- and this is no empty boast, but the simple truth -- I am
unbeatable. But this time everything seems difficult, I am too distracted, every now
and then, in the middle of my work, I press my ear to the wall and listen, and without
taking any notice let the soil that I have just lifted trickle back into the passage again.
The final embellishments, which demand a stricter attention, I can hardly achieve at
all. Hideous protuberances, disturbing cracks remain, not to speak of the fact that the
old buoyancy simply cannot be restored again to a wall patched up in such a way. I try
to comfort myself with the reflection that my present work is only temporary. When I
return after peace has been restored I shall repair everything properly: work will be
mere play to me then. Oh yes, work is mere play in fairy tales, and this comfort of
mine belongs to the realm of fairy tales too. It would be far better to do the work
thoroughly now, at once, far more reasonable than perpetually to interrupt it and
wander off through the passages to discover new sources of noise, which is easy

enough, all that is needed being to stop at any point one likes and listen. And that is
not the end of my useless discoveries. Sometimes I fancy that the noise has stopped,
for it makes long pauses; sometimes such a faint whistling escapes one, one's own
blood is pounding all too loudly in one's ears; then two pauses come one after another,
and for a while one thinks that the whistling has stopped forever. I listen no longer, I
jump up, all life is transfigured; it is as if the fountains from which flows the silence of
the burrow were unsealed. I refrain from verifying my discovery at once, I want first to
find someone to whom in all good faith I can confide it, so I rush to the Castle Keep, I
remember, for I and everything in me has awakened to new life, that I have eaten
nothing for a long time, I snatch something or other from among my store of food
half-buried under the debris and hurriedly begin to swallow it while I hurry back to
the place where I made my incredible discovery, I only want to assure myself about it
incidentally, perfunctorily, while I am eating; I listen, but the most perfunctory
listening shows at once that I was shamefully deceived: away there in the distance the
whistling still remains unshaken. And I spit out my food, and would like to trample it
underfoot, and go back to my task, not caring which I take up; anyplace where it seems
to be needed, and there are enough places like that, I mechanically start on something
or other, just as if the overseer had appeared and I must make a pretense of working
for his benefit. But hardly have I begun to work in this fashion when it may happen
that I make a new discovery. The noise seems to have become louder, not much
louder, of course -- here it is always a matter of the subtlest shades -- but all the same
sufficiently louder for the ear to recognize it clearly. And this growing-louder is like a
coming-nearer; still more distinctly than you hear the increasing loudness of the noise,
you can literally see the step that brings it closer to you. You leap back from the wall,
you try to grasp at once all the possible consequences that this discovery will bring
with it. You feel as if you had never really organized the burrow for defense against
attack; you had intended to do so, but despite all your experience of life the danger of
an attack, and consequently the need to organize the place for defense, seemed remote
-- or rather not remote (how could it possibly be!) -- but infinitely less important than
the need to put it in a state where one could live peacefully; and so that consideration

was given priority in everything relating to the burrow. Many things in this direction
might have been done without affecting the plan of the whole; most incomprehensibly
they have been neglected. I have had a great deal of luck all those years, luck has
spoiled me; I have had anxieties, but anxiety leads to nothing when you have luck to
back you.
The thing to do, really to do now, would be to go carefully over the burrow and
consider every possible means of defending it, work out a plan of defense and a
corresponding plan of construction, and then start on the work at once with the vigor
of youth. That is the work that would really be needed, for which, I may add, it is now
far too late in the day; yet that is what would really be needed, and not the digging of a
grand experimental trench, whose only real result would be to deliver me hand and
foot to the search for danger, out of the foolish fear that it will not arrive quickly
enough of itself. Suddenly I cannot comprehend my former plan. I can find no
slightest trace of reason in what had seemed so reasonable; once more I lay aside my
work and even my listening; I have no wish to discover any further signs that the noise
is growing louder; I have had enough of discoveries; I let everything slide; I would be
quite content if I could only still the conflict going on within me. Once more I let my
passages lead me where they will, I come to more and more remote ones that I have
not yet seen since my return, and that are quite unsullied by my scratching paws, and
whose silence rises up to meet me and sinks into me. I do not surrender to it, I hurry
on, I do not know what I want, probably simply to put off the hour. I stray so far that I
find myself at the labyrinth; the idea of listening beneath the moss covering tempts
me; such distant things, distant for the moment, chain my interest. I push my way up
and listen. Deep stillness; how lovely it is here, outside there nobody troubles about
my burrow, everybody has his own affairs, which have no connection with me; how
have I managed to achieve this? Here under the moss covering is perhaps the only
place in my burrow now where I can listen for hours and hear nothing. A complete
reversal of things in the burrow; what was once the place of danger has become a place
of tranquility, while the Castle Keep has been plunged into the melee of the world and

all its perils. Still worse, even here there is no peace in reality, here nothing has
changed; silent or vociferous, danger lies in ambush as before above the moss, but I
have grown insensitive to it, my mind is far too much taken up with the whistling in
my walls. Is my mind really taken up with it? It grows louder, it comes nearer, but I
wriggle my way through the labyrinth and make a couch for myself up here under the
moss; it is almost as if I were already leaving the house to the whistler, content if I can
only have a little peace up here. To the whistler? Have I come, then, to a new
conclusion concerning the cause of the noise? But surely the noise is caused by the
channels bored by the small fry? Is not that my considered opinion? It seems to me
that I have not retreated from it thus far. And if the noise is not caused directly by
these channels, it is indirectly. And even if it should have no connection with them
whatever, one is not at liberty to make a priori assumptions, but must wait until one
finds the cause, or it reveals itself. One could play with hypotheses, of course, even at
this stage; for instance, it is possible that there has been a water burst at some distance
away, and what seems a piping or whistling to me is in reality a gurgling. But apart
from the fact that I have no experience in that sphere -- the groundwater that I found
at the start I drained away at once, and in this sandy soil it has never returned -- apart
from this fact the noise is undeniably a whistling and simply not to be translated into a
gurgling. But what avail all exhortations to be calm; my imagination will not rest, and I
have actually come to believe -- it is useless to deny it to myself -- that the whistling is
made by some beast, and moreover not by a great many small ones, but by a single big
one. Many signs contradict this. The noise can be heard everywhere and always at the
same strength, and moreover uniformly, both by day and night. At first, therefore, one
cannot but incline to the hypothesis of a great number of little animals; but as I must
have found some of them during my digging and I have found nothing, it only remains
for me to assume the existence of a great beast, especially as the things that seem to
contradict the hypothesis are merely things which make the beast, not so much
impossible, as merely dangerous beyond all one's powers of conception. For that
reason alone have I resisted this hypothesis. I shall cease from this self-deception. For
a long time already I have played with the idea that the beast can be heard at such a

great distance because it works so furiously; it burrows as fast through the ground as
another can walk on the open road; the ground still trembles at its burrowing when it
has ceased; this reverberation and the noise of the boring itself unite into one sound at
such a great distance, and I, as I hear only the last dying ebb of that sound, hear it
always at the same uniform strength. It follows from this also that the beast is not
making for me, seeing that the noise never changes; more likely it has a plan in view
whose purpose I cannot decipher; I merely assume that the beast -- and I make no
claim whatever that it knows of my existence -- is encircling me; it has probably made
several circles around my burrow already since I began to observe it. The nature of the
noise, the piping or whistling, gives me much food for thought. When I scratch and
scrape in the soil in my own fashion the sound is quite different. I can explain the
whistling only in this way: that the beast's chief means of burrowing is not its claws,
which it probably employs merely as a secondary resource, but its snout or its muzzle,
which, of course, apart from its enormous strength, must also be fairly sharp at the
point. It probably bores its snout into the earth with one mighty push and tears out a
great lump; while it is doing that I hear nothing; that is the pause; but then it draws in
the air for a new push. This indrawal of its breath, which must be an earthshaking
noise, not only because of the beast's strength, but of its haste, its furious lust for work
as well: this noise I hear then as a faint whistling. But quite incomprehensible remains
the beast's capacity to work without stopping; perhaps the short pauses provide also
the opportunity of snatching a moment's rest; but apparently the beast has never yet
allowed itself a really long rest, day and night it goes on burrowing, always with the
same freshness and vigor, always thinking of its object, which must be achieved with
the utmost expedition, and which it has the ability to achieve with ease. Now I could
not have foreseen such an opponent. But apart altogether from the beast's peculiar
characteristics, what is happening now is only something which I should really have
feared all the time, something against which I should have been constantly prepared:
the fact that someone would come. By what chance can everything have flowed on so
quietly and happily for such a long time? Who can have diverted my enemies from
their path, and forced them to make a wide detour around my property? Why have I

been spared for so long, only to be delivered to such terrors now? Compared with this,
what are all the petty dangers in brooding over which I have spent my life! Had I
hoped, as owner of the burrow, to be in a stronger position than any enemy who might
chance to appear? But simply by virtue of being owner of this great vulnerable edifice I
am obviously defenseless against any serious attack. The joy of possessing it has
spoiled me, the vulnerability of the burrow has made me vulnerable; any wound to it
hurts me as if I myself were hit. It is precisely this that I should have foreseen; instead
of thinking only of my own defense -- and how perfunctorily and vainly I have done
even that -- I should have thought of the defense of the burrow. Above all, provision
should have been made for cutting off sections of the burrow, and as many as possible
of them, from the endangered sections when they are attacked; this should have been
done by means of improvised landslides, calculated to operate at a moment's notice;
moreover these should have been so thick, and have provided such an effectual barrier,
that the attacker would not even guess that the real burrow only began at the other
side. More, these landslides should have been so devised that they not only concealed
the burrow, but also entombed the attacker. Not the slightest attempt have I made to
carry out such a plan, nothing at all has been done in this direction, I have been as
thoughtless as a child, I have passed my manhood's years in childish games, I have
done nothing but play even with the thought of danger, I have shirked really taking
thought for actual danger. And there has been no lack of warning.
Nothing, of course, approaching the present situation has happened before;
nevertheless there was an incident not unlike it when the burrow was only beginning.
The main difference between that time and this is simply that the burrow was only
beginning then. . . In those days I was literally nothing more than a humble apprentice,
the labyrinth was only sketched out in rough outline, I had already dug a little room,
but the proportions and the execution of the walls were sadly bungled; in short,
everything was so tentative that it could only be regarded as an experiment, as
something which, if one lost patience some day, one could leave behind without much
regret. Then one day as I lay on a heap of earth resting from my labors -- I have rested

far too often from my labors all my life -- suddenly I heard a noise in the distance.
Being young at the time, I was less frightened than curious. I left my work to look after
itself and set myself to listen; I listened and listened, and had no wish to fly up to my
moss covering and stretch myself out there so that I might not have to hear. I did
listen, at least. I could clearly recognize that the noise came from some kind of
burrowing similar to my own; it was somewhat fainter, of course, but how much of
that might be put down to the distance one could not tell. I was intensely interested,
but otherwise calm and cool. Perhaps I am in somebody else's burrow, I thought to
myself, and now the owner is boring his way toward me. If that assumption had
proved to be correct I would have gone away, for I have never had any desire for
conquest or bloodshed, and begun building somewhere else. But after all I was still
young and still without a burrow, so I could remain quite cool. Besides, the further
course of the noise brought no real cause for apprehension, except that it was not easy
to explain. If whoever was boring there was really making for me, because he had
heard me boring, then if he changed his direction, as now actually happened, it could
not be told whether he did this because my pause for rest had deprived him of any
definite point to make toward, or because -- which was more plausible -- he had
himself changed his plans. But perhaps I had been deceived altogether, and he had
never been actually making in my direction; at any rate the noise grew louder for a
while as if he were drawing nearer, and being young at that time I probably would not
have been displeased to see the burrower suddenly rising from the ground; but
nothing of that kind happened, at a certain point the sound of boring began to weaken,
it grew fainter and fainter, as if the burrower were gradually diverging from his first
route, and suddenly it broke off altogether, as if he had decided now to take the
diametrically opposite direction and were making straight away from me into the
distance. For a long time I still went on listening for him in the silence, before I
returned once more to my work. Now that warning was definite enough, but I soon
forgot it, and it scarcely influenced my building plans.
Between that day and this lie my years of maturity, but is it not as if there were

no interval at all between them? I still take long rests from my labors and listen at the
wall, and the burrower has changed his intention anew, he has turned back, he is
returning from his journey, thinking he has given me ample time in the interval to
prepare for his reception. But on my side everything is worse prepared for than it was
then; the great burrow stands defenseless, and I am no longer a young apprentice, but
an old architect, and the powers I still have fail me when the decisive hour comes; yet
old as I am it seems to me that I would gladly be still older, so old that I should never
be able to rise again from my resting place under the moss. For to be honest I cannot
endure the place, I rise up and rush, as if I had filled myself up there with new
anxieties instead of peace, down into the house again. What was the state of things the
last time I was here? Had the whistling grown fainter? No, it had grown louder. I listen
at ten places chosen at random and clearly notice the deception; the whistling is just
the same as ever, nothing has altered. Over there, there are no changes, there one is
calm and not worried about time; but here every instant frets and gnaws at the
listener. I go once more the long road to the Castle Keep, all my surroundings seem
filled with agitation, seem to be looking at me, and then look away again so as not to
disturb me, yet cannot refrain the very next moment from trying to read the saving
solution from my expression. I shake my head, I have not yet found any solution. Nor
do I go to the Castle Keep in pursuance of any plan. I pass the spot where I had
intended to begin the experimental trench, I look it over once more, it would have
been an admirable place to begin at, the trench's course would have been in the
direction where lay the majority of the tiny ventilation holes, which would have greatly
lightened my labors; perhaps I should not have had to dig very far, should not even
have had to dig to the source of the noise; perhaps if I had listened at the ventilation
holes it would have been enough. But no consideration is potent enough to animate
me to this labor of digging. This trench will bring me certainty, you say? I have
reached the stage where I no longer wish to have certainty. In the Castle Keep I choose
a lovely piece of flayed red flesh and creep with it into one of the heaps of earth; there I
shall have silence at least, such silence, at any rate, as still can be said to exist here. I
munch and nibble at the flesh, think of the strange beast going its own road in the

distance, and then again that I should enjoy my store of food as fully as possible, while
I still have the chance. This last is probably the sole plan I have left that I can carry out.
For the rest I try to unriddle the beast's plans. Is it on its wanderings, or is it working
on its own burrow? If it is on its wanderings then perhaps an understanding with it
might be possible. If it should really break through to the burrow I shall give it some of
my stores and it will go on its way again. It will go its way again, a fine story! Lying in
my heap of earth I can naturally dream of all sorts of things, even of an understanding
with the beast, though I know well enough that no such thing can happen, and that at
the instant when we see each other, more, at the moment when we merely guess at
each other's presence, we shall both blindly bare our claws and teeth, neither of us a
second before or after the other, both of us filled with a new and different hunger,
even if we should already be gorged to bursting. And with entire justice, for who, even
if he were merely on his wanderings, would not change his itinerary and his plans for
the future on catching sight of the burrow? But perhaps the beast is digging in its own
burrow, in which case I cannot even dream of an understanding. Even if it should be
such a peculiar beast that its burrow could tolerate a neighbor, my burrow could not
tolerate a neighbor, at least not a clearly audible one. Now actually the beast seems to
be a great distance away; if it would only withdraw a little farther the noise too would
probably disappear; perhaps in that case everything would be peaceful again as in the
old days; all this would then become a painful but salutary lesson, spurring me on to
make the most diverse improvements on the burrow; if I have peace, and danger does
not immediately threaten me, I am still quite fit for all sorts of hard work; perhaps,
considering the enormous possibilities which its powers of work open before it, the
beast has given up the idea of extending'its burrow in my direction, and is
compensating itself for that in some other one. That consummation also cannot, of
course, be brought about by negotiation, but only by the beast itself, or by some
compulsion exercised from my side. In both cases the decisive factor will be whether
the beast knows about me, and if so what it knows. The more I reflect upon it the
more improbable does it seem to me that the beast has even heard me; it is possible,
though I can't imagine it, that it can have received news of me in some other way, but 
it has certainly never heard me. So long as I still knew nothing about it, it simply
cannot have heard me, for at that time I kept very quiet, nothing could be more quiet
than my return to the burrow; afterwards, when I dug the experimental trenches,
perhaps it could have heard me, though my style of digging makes very little noise; but
if it had heard me I must have noticed some sign of it, the beast must at least have
stopped its work every now and then to listen. But all remained unchanged, that

*** END OF THE EBOOK ***
