*** START OF THE EBOOK ***

1
Arrival
It was late evening when K. arrived. The village lay deep in snow.
There was nothing to be seen of Castle Mount, for mist and darkness
surrounded it, and not the faintest glimmer of light showed where
the great castle lay. K. stood on the wooden bridge leading from the
road to the village for a long time, looking up at what seemed to be
a void.
Then he went in search of somewhere to stay the night. People
were still awake at the inn. The landlord had no room available, but
although greatly surprised and confused by the arrival of a guest so
late at night, he was willing to let K. sleep on a straw mattress in the
saloon bar. K. agreed to that. Several of the local rustics were still
sitting over their beer, but he didn’t feel like talking to anyone. He
fetched the straw mattress down from the attic himself, and lay down
near the stove. It was warm, the locals were silent, his weary eyes
gave them a cursory inspection, and then he fell asleep.
But soon afterwards he was woken again. A young man in town
clothes, with a face like an actor’s—narrowed eyes, strongly marked
eyebrows—was standing beside him with the landlord. The rustics
were still there too, and some of them had turned their chairs round
so that they could see and hear better. The young man apologized
very civilly for having woken K., introduced himself as the son of the
castle warden, and added: ‘This village belongs to the castle, so anyone
who stays or spends the night here is, so to speak, staying or spending the night at the castle. And no one’s allowed to do that without a
permit from the count. However, you don’t have any such permit, or
at least you haven’t shown one.’
K. had half sat up, had smoothed down his hair, and was now looking up at the two men. ‘What village have I come to, then?’ he asked.
‘Is there a castle in these parts?’
‘There most certainly is,’ said the young man slowly, as some of
those present shook their heads at K.’s ignorance. ‘Count Westwest’s*
castle.’

‘And I need this permit to spend the night here?’ asked K., as if to
convince himself that he had not, by any chance, dreamed the earlier
information.
‘Yes, you need a permit,’ was the reply, and there was downright
derision at K.’s expense in the young man’s voice as, with arm outstretched, he asked the landlord and the guests: ‘Or am I wrong?
Doesn’t he need a permit?’
‘Well, I’ll have to go and get a permit, then,’ said K., yawning, and
throwing oﬀ his blanket as if to rise to his feet.
‘Oh yes? Who from?’ asked the young man.
‘Why, from the count,’ said K. ‘I suppose there’s nothing else for it.’
‘What, go and get a permit from the count himself at midnight?’
cried the young man, retreating a step.
‘Is that impossible?’ asked K., unruﬄed. ‘If so, why did you wake
me up?’
At this the young man was positively beside himself. ‘The manners
of a vagrant!’ he cried. ‘I demand respect for the count’s authority!
I woke you up to tell you that you must leave the count’s land
immediately.’
‘That’s enough of this farce,’ said K. in a noticeably quiet voice.
He lay down and pulled the blanket over him. ‘Young man, you’re
going rather too far, and I’ll have something to say about your conduct tomorrow. The landlord and these gentlemen are my witnesses,
if I need any. As for the rest of it, let me tell you that I’m the land
surveyor,* and the count sent for me. My assistants will be coming
tomorrow by carriage with our surveying instruments. I didn’t want
to deprive myself of a good walk here through the snow, but unfortunately I did lose my way several times, and that’s why I arrived so
late. I myself was well aware, even before you delivered your lecture,
that it was too late to present myself at the castle. That’s why I contented myself with sleeping the night here, and you have been—to
put it mildly—uncivil enough to disturb my slumbers. And that’s all
the explanation I’m making. Goodnight, gentlemen.’ And K. turned
to the stove.
‘Land surveyor?’ he heard someone ask hesitantly behind his back,
and then everyone fell silent. But the young man soon pulled himself
together and told the landlord, in a tone just muted enough to sound
as if he were showing consideration for the sleeping K., but loud
enough for him to hear what was said: ‘I’ll telephone and ask.’ Oh, so

there was a telephone in this village inn, was there? They were very
well equipped here. As a detail that surprised K., but on the whole
he had expected this. It turned out that the telephone was installed
almost right above his head, but drowsy as he was, he had failed to
notice it. If the young man really had to make a telephone call, then
with the best will in the world he could not fail to disturb K.’s sleep.
The only point at issue was whether K. would let him use the telephone, and he decided that he would. In which case, however, there
was no point in making out that he was asleep, so he turned over on
his back again. He saw the locals clustering nervously together and
conferring; well, the arrival of a land surveyor was no small matter.
The kitchen door had opened and there, ﬁlling the whole doorway,
stood the monumental ﬁgure of the landlady. The landlord approached
on tiptoe to let her know what was going on. And now the telephone
conversation began. The warden was asleep, but a deputy warden, or
one of several such deputies, a certain Mr Fritz, was on the line. The
young man, who identiﬁed himself as Schwarzer, told Mr Fritz how
he had found K., a man of very ragged appearance in his thirties,
sleeping peacefully on a straw mattress, with a tiny rucksack as a pillow
and a gnarled walking-stick within reach. He had naturally felt suspicious, said the young man, and as the landlord had clearly neglected
to do his duty it had been up to him to investigate the matter. K., he
added, had acted very churlishly on being woken, questioned, and
threatened in due form with expulsion from the county, although, as
it ﬁnally turned out, perhaps with some reason, for he claimed to be
a land surveyor and said his lordship the count had sent for him. Of
course it was at least their formal duty to check this claim, so he,
Schwarzer, would like Fritz to enquire in Central Oﬃce, ﬁnd out
whether any such surveyor was really expected, and telephone back
with the answer at once.
Then all was quiet. Fritz went to make his enquiries, and here at
the inn they waited for the answer, K. staying where he was, not even
turning round, not appearing at all curious, but looking straight ahead
of him. The way Schwarzer told his tale, with a mingling of malice
and caution, gave him an idea of what might be called the diplomatic
training of which even such insigniﬁcant ﬁgures in the castle as
Schwarzer had a command. There was no lack of industry there either;
Central Oﬃce was working even at night, and clearly it answered
questions quickly, for Fritz soon rang back. His report, however,

seemed to be a very short one, for Schwarzer immediately slammed
the receiver down in anger. ‘I said as much!’ he cried. ‘There’s no
record of any land surveyor; this is a common, lying vagabond and
probably worse.’ For a moment K. thought all of them—Schwarzer,
the local rustics, the landlord and landlady—were going to fall on
him, and to avoid at least the ﬁrst onslaught he crawled under the
blanket entirely. Then—he slowly put his head out—the telephone
rang again and, so it seemed to K., with particular force. Although it
was unlikely that this call too could be about K., they all stopped
short, and Schwarzer went back to the phone. He listened to an
explanation of some length, and then said quietly, ‘A mistake, then?
This is very awkward for me. You say the oﬃce manager himself
telephoned? Strange, strange. But how am I to explain it to the land
surveyor now?’*
K. pricked up his ears. So the castle had described him as ‘the land
surveyor’. In one way this was unfortunate, since it showed that they
knew all they needed to know about him at the castle, they had
weighed up the balance of power, and were cheerfully accepting his
challenge. In another way, however, it was fortunate, for it conﬁrmed
his opinion that he was being underestimated, and would have more
freedom than he had dared to hope from the outset. And if they
thought they could keep him in a constant state of terror by recognizing his qualiﬁcations as a land surveyor in this intellectually supercilious way, as it certainly was, then they were wrong. He felt a slight
frisson, yes, but that was all.
K. waved away Schwarzer, who was timidly approaching; he
declined to move into the landlord’s room, as he was now urged to
do, merely accepting a nightcap from the landlord and the use of a
washbasin, with soap and a towel, from the landlady, and he didn’t
even have to ask for the saloon to be cleared, since all present were
hurrying out with their faces averted, perhaps to keep him from
identifying them in the morning. The light was put out, and he was
left alone at last. He slept soundly through until morning, scarcely
disturbed once or twice by rats scurrying past.
After breakfast, which like K.’s entire board and lodging, so the
landlord told him, was to be paid for by the castle, he thought he
would go straight into the village. But when the landlord, to whom,
remembering his behaviour yesterday, he had said only the bare
minimum, kept hovering around him with a silent plea in his eyes,

he took pity on the man and asked him to sit down and keep him
company for a while.
‘I haven’t met the count yet,’ said K., ‘but they say he pays well
for good work. Is that so? If you’re travelling as far from your wife
and child* as I am, you want to bring something worthwhile home.’
‘No need to worry about that, sir. There’ve never been any complaints of poor pay.’
‘Well,’ said K., ‘I’m not the timid sort myself, and I can speak my
mind even to a count, but of course it’s far better to be on friendly
terms with such gentlemen.’
The landlord was perched opposite K. on the edge of the windowsill, not daring to sit anywhere more comfortable, and he kept looking at K. with his large, brown, anxious eyes. To begin with he had
moved close to his guest, but now he seemed to want to run away.
Was he afraid of being interrogated about the count? Did he fear
that, although he was now calling his guest ‘sir’, K. was not to be
relied on? K. thought he had better distract the man’s mind. Looking
at his watch, he said: ‘Well, my assistants will soon be arriving. Will
you be able to accommodate them here?’
‘Of course, sir,’ said the landlord. ‘But won’t they be staying with
you up at the castle?’
Was he so easily and cheerfully giving up the prospect of guests,
and in particular the custom of K., whom he seemed anxious to send
oﬀ to the castle?
‘That’s not decided yet,’ said K. ‘First I must ﬁnd out what kind
of work they want me to do. For instance, if I’m to work down here,
then it would be more sensible for me to stay down here too. And in
addition, I’m afraid that living up in the castle wouldn’t agree with
me. I always prefer to be a free agent.’
‘You don’t know what the castle is like,’ said the landlord quietly.
‘True,’ said K. ‘One ought not to judge too early. At the moment
all I know about the castle is that up there they know how to pick a
good land surveyor. And perhaps there are other advantages there as
well.’ And he rose to his feet, to allow the landlord, who was uneasily
biting his lip, a chance to be rid of his company. It wasn’t easy to win
this man’s trust.
As K. was walking away, he noticed a dark portrait in a dark frame
on the wall. He had seen it even from where he lay last night, but at
that distance he hadn’t been able to make out the details, and had

thought that the real picture had been removed from the frame, leaving only a dark backing. But there was indeed a picture, as he now
saw, the head and shoulders of a man of about ﬁfty. The sitter’s head
was bent so low on his chest that you could hardly see his eyes, and
the reason why he held it like that seemed to be the weight of his
high, heavy forehead and large hooked nose. The man’s beard, which
was squashed in at his throat by the angle of his head, stood out below
his chin. His left hand was spread and he was running it through his
thick hair, but he could raise his head no higher. ‘Who’s that?’ asked
K. ‘The count?’ He was standing in front of the portrait, and did not
even look at the landlord. ‘Oh no,’ said the landlord, ‘that’s the castle
warden.’ ‘Well, they have a ﬁne warden at the castle, to be sure,’ said
K. ‘A pity his son has turned out so badly.’ ‘No, no,’ said the landlord,
drawing K. slightly down to him and whispering in his ear. ‘Schwarzer
was putting on airs yesterday; his father is only a deputy warden, and
one of the most junior of them.’ At this moment the landlord seemed
like a child to K. ‘What a rascal!’ he said, laughing. However, the
landlord did not join in his laughter, but said, ‘His father is powerful
too.’ ‘Oh, come along!’ said K. ‘You think everyone is powerful.
Including me, I wonder?’ ‘No,’ said the man, diﬃdently but gravely,
‘I don’t think you are powerful.’ ‘You’re a very good observer, then,’
said K. ‘The fact is, and just between you and me, I really am not
powerful. As a result I probably feel no less respect for the powerful
than you do, but I am not as honest as you and won’t always admit
it.’ And to cheer the landlord and show his own good-will, he tapped
him lightly on the cheek. At this the man did smile a little. He was only
a boy really, with a soft and almost beardless face. How had he come
to marry his stout, elderly wife, who could be seen through a hatch
bustling about the kitchen next door, hands on her hips, elbows jutting? But K. did not want to probe the man any further now, or wipe
the smile he had ﬁnally won from him oﬀ his face; he just signed to
him to open the door and stepped out into the ﬁne winter morning.
Now he could see the castle above, distinctly outlined in the clear
air, and standing out even more distinctly because of the thin covering of snow lying everywhere and changing the shape of everything.
In fact, much less snow seemed to have fallen up on Castle Mount
than here in the village, where K. found it as diﬃcult to make his way
along the road as it had been yesterday. Here the snow came up to
the cottage windows and weighed down on the low rooftops, while

on the mountain everything rose into the air, free and light, or at least
that was how it looked from here.
Altogether the castle, as seen in the distance, lived up to K.’s
expectations. It was neither an old knightly castle from the days of
chivalry, nor a showy new structure, but an extensive complex of
buildings, a few of them with two storeys, but many of them lower
and crowded close together. If you hadn’t known it was a castle you
might have taken it for a small town. K. saw only a single tower, and
could not make out whether it was a dwelling or belonged to a
church. Flocks of crows were circling around it.
His eyes ﬁxed on the castle, K. went on, paying no attention to
anything else. But as he came closer he thought the castle disappointing; after all, it was only a poor kind of collection of cottages assembled into a little town, and distinguished only by the fact that, while
it might all be built of stone, the paint had ﬂaked oﬀ long ago, and
the stone itself seemed to be crumbling away. K. thought ﬂeetingly
of his own home town, which was hardly inferior to this castle. If he
had come here only to see the place, he would have made a long
journey for nothing much, and he would have done better to revisit
the old home that he hadn’t seen for so long. In his mind, he compared the church tower of his childhood home with the tower up
above. The former, tapering into a spire and coming down to a broad,
red-tiled roof, was certainly an earthly building—what else can we
build?—but it had been erected for a higher purpose than these
huddled, low-built houses and made a clearer statement than the
dull, workaday world of this place did. The tower up here—the only
visible one—now turned out to belong to a dwelling, perhaps the
main part of the castle. It was a simple, round building, partly covered
with ivy, and it had small windows, now shining in the sun—there was
something crazed about the sight—and was built into the shape of a
balcony at the top, with insecure, irregular battlements, crumbling as
if drawn by an anxious or careless child as they stood out, zigzag
fashion, against the blue sky. It was as if some melancholy inhabitant
of the place, who should really have stayed locked up in the most
remote room in the house, had broken through the roof and was
standing erect to show himself to the world.
Once again K. stopped, as if standing still improved his powers
of judgement. But his attention was distracted. Beyond the village
church where he now was—in fact it was only a chapel, extended like

a barn so that it could hold the whole congregation—lay the school.
It was a long, low building, curiously combining the character of something temporary and something very old, and it stood in a fenced
garden that was now covered with snow. The children were just
coming out, with their teacher. They crowded around him, all eyes
were ﬁxed on him, and they were talking away the whole time, so fast
that K. couldn’t make out what they were saying. The teacher, a
small, narrow-shouldered young man who held himself very
upright, but without appearing ridiculous, had already seen K. from
a distance—after all, apart from his own little ﬂock K. was the only
living soul to be seen far and wide. K., as the stranger here, greeted
him ﬁrst, noticing that despite his small stature he was used to being
in command. ‘Good morning, sir,’ he said. All at once the children
fell silent, and the teacher probably appreciated this sudden silence
in anticipation of his remarks. ‘Looking at the castle, are you?’ he
asked, more gently than K. had expected, but in a tone suggesting
that he didn’t like what K. was doing. ‘Yes,’ said K. ‘I’m a stranger
here; I arrived in the village only yesterday evening.’ ‘Don’t you like
the castle?’ the teacher was quick to ask. ‘What?’ K. asked in return,
slightly surprised. He repeated the question in a milder tone. ‘Do
I like the castle? What makes you think that I don’t?’ ‘Strangers
never do,’ said the teacher. Here K. changed the subject, to avoid
saying anything the teacher didn’t like, and asked, ‘I expect you
know the count?’ ‘No,’ said the teacher, and he was about to turn
away, but K. wasn’t giving up, and asked again: ‘What? You don’t
know the count?’ ‘What makes you think I would?’ asked the teacher
very quietly, and he added in a louder voice, speaking French:
‘Kindly recollect that we’re in the company of innocent children.’
This made K. think he might properly ask: ‘Could I visit you one
day, sir? I shall be here for some time, and feel rather isolated; I don’t
ﬁt in with the local rustics here, and I don’t suppose I shall ﬁt in at
the castle either.’ ‘There’s no distinction between the local people and
the castle,’ said the teacher. ‘Maybe not,’ said K., ‘but that makes no
diﬀerence to my situation. May I visit you some time?’ ‘I lodge in
Swan Alley, at the butcher’s house.’ This was more of a statement
than an invitation, but all the same K. said: ‘Good, then I’ll come.’
The teacher nodded, and went on with the crowd of children, who
all started shouting again. They soon disappeared along a street that
ran steeply downhill.

But K. was distracted, fretting at this conversation. For the ﬁrst
time since his arrival he felt real weariness. At ﬁrst the long journey
here had not seemed to aﬀect him at all—and he had walked for
days, step after step, on and on!—but now all that physical strain was
claiming its due, and at just the wrong time. He was irresistibly drawn
to seek new acquaintances, but every new acquaintance left him
wearier than ever. If he forced himself to walk at least as far as the
entrance to the castle, that was more than enough in his present state.
So he walked on, but it was a long way. For he was in the main
street of the village, and it did not lead to Castle Mount but merely
passed close to it before turning aside, as if on purpose, and although
it moved no further away from the castle, it came no closer either. K.
kept thinking that the road must ﬁnally bring him to the castle, and,
if only because of that expectation, he went on. Because of his weariness he naturally shrank from leaving the road, and he was surprised
by the extent of the village, which seemed as if it would never end,
with more and more little houses, their window-panes covered by
frost-ﬂowers, and with the snow and the absence of any human
beings—so at last he tore himself away from the road on which he
had persisted and struck out down a narrow alley where the snow lay
even deeper. Pulling his feet out of it as they kept sinking in again
was hard work. He broke out in a sweat, and suddenly he stopped
and could go no further.
But he wasn’t entirely alone after all, there were cottages to his
right and his left. He made a snowball and threw it at a window. The
front door opened at once—the ﬁrst door he had seen opening on his
entire walk all the way through the village—and he saw an old man
in a brown fur jacket, his head on one side, looking both frail and
friendly. ‘May I come into your house for a little while?’ asked K.
‘I’m very tired.’ He did not hear what the old man was saying, but
gratefully he realized that a plank was being pushed his way. This got
him clear of the snow straight away, and a few more paces took him
into the parlour of the cottage.
It was a large, dimly lit room. Coming in from outside, he could
see nothing at ﬁrst. K. staggered and nearly fell over a washingtrough; a woman’s hand caught him. He heard a number of children
shouting in one corner. Steam billowed out of another, turning the
twilight into darkness. K. might have been surrounded by clouds.
‘He’s drunk,’ someone said. ‘Who are you?’ cried a peremptory

voice, and added, probably turning to the old man: ‘Why did you let
him in? Are we to let in everyone who goes slinking around the
streets?’ ‘I’m the count’s land surveyor,’ said K., by way of justifying
himself to the still-invisible speaker. ‘Oh, it’s the land surveyor,’
said a woman’s voice, and then there was total silence. ‘You know
me?’ asked K. ‘Yes, indeed,’ was all the ﬁrst voice said again, brieﬂy.
Knowing who K. was didn’t seem to recommend him to these people.
At last some of the steam drifted away, and gradually K. was able
to get his bearings. This seemed to be wash-day for everyone. Clothes
were being washed near the door. But the vapour came from the lefthand corner, where two men were having a bath in steaming water in
a wooden tub larger than any K. had ever seen before; it was about
the size of two beds. But even more surprising, although it was hard
to say just why, was the right-hand corner of the room. Through a
large hatch, the only opening in the back wall of the parlour, pale
snowy light came in, no doubt from the yard, and cast a sheen like
silk* on the dress of a woman almost lying, for she looked so tired, in
a tall armchair far back in that corner. She had a baby at her breast.
A few children were playing around her, obviously village children,
although she did not look like a villager herself, but sickness and
weariness will make even rustics appear reﬁned.
‘Sit down,’ said one of the men, a bearded, moustached fellow who
kept his mouth open all the time under his moustache, breathing
noisily. Raising his hand above the side of the tub, a comical sight, he
pointed to a chest, and in doing so splashed hot water all over K.’s
face. The old man who had let K. in was sitting on the chest too, lost
in thought. K. was glad of the chance to sit down at last. No one
bothered about him any more. The woman at the washing-trough,
who was blonde, young, and buxom, was singing softly at her work,
the men in the tub were stamping their feet and turning this way and
that, the children were trying to get closer to them, but were always
chased away by great jets of water which did not spare K. either, the
woman in the armchair lay as if lifeless, not even looking down at the
child at her breast, but gazing vaguely upwards.
K. had probably been watching this unchanging, sad, and beautiful
scene for some time, but then he must have fallen asleep, for when a
loud voice hailed him he woke with a start and found that his head
was resting on the shoulder of the old man beside him. The men had
ﬁnished bathing in the tub—the children were now splashing about

in it, with the blonde woman watching over them—and were standing
fully clothed in front of K. The bearded man with the loud voice turned
out to be the less important of the two. The other man, no taller than
his friend and with a much sparser beard, was a quiet, slow-thinking
fellow, sturdy of stature and broad of face, and held his head bent.
‘Mr Land Surveyor, sir,’ he said, ‘forgive the incivility, but you can’t
stay here.’ ‘I didn’t want to stay,’ said K., ‘only to rest for a little
while. I feel rested now, and I’ll be on my way.’ ‘You’re probably
surprised to ﬁnd us so inhospitable,’ said the man, ‘but hospitality
isn’t a custom here, and we don’t need any visitors.’ Slightly refreshed
by sleep, and listening a little more attentively than before, K. was
glad to hear him speak so frankly. He was moving more easily by this
time and, placing his walking-stick now here, now there, he approached
the woman in the armchair. He himself was physically the largest
person in the room.
‘To be sure,’ said K. ‘Why would you need visitors? But a visitor
or so is needed now and then, for instance me, as a land surveyor.’
‘I don’t know about that,’ said the man slowly. ‘If they sent for you,
then they probably do need you, but that’s an exception. As for us
ordinary folk, we stick to the rules, and you can’t hold that against
us.’ ‘No, no,’ said K. ‘I owe you thanks, you and everyone here.’ And
when none of them expected it, he suddenly swung round to stand
in front of the woman. She looked at K. from tired blue eyes; a translucent silk headscarf came halfway down her forehead, and the baby
was sleeping at her breast. ‘Who are you?’ asked K. Dismissively—and
it was not clear whether her disdain was meant for K. or her own
answer—she said: ‘I’m from the castle.’
All this had taken only a moment, but already the two men were
one on each side of K., forcibly frogmarching him to the door, as if
there were no other means of communication. The old man, watching, seemed pleased about something, and clapped his hands. The
washerwoman too laughed as she stood among the children, who
were suddenly romping noisily.
As for K., he was soon out in the alley, with the two men watching
him from the doorway. Snow was falling again, but it seemed a little
brighter than before. The bearded man called impatiently: ‘Where
do you want to go? This is the way to the castle, that’s the way to the
village.’ K. did not answer, but said to the other man, who despite
his superior status seemed more approachable: ‘Who are you? To

whom do I owe thanks for my rest here?’ ‘I am Lasemann,* the master
tanner,’ was the reply, ‘and you owe no one any thanks.’ ‘Very well,’
said K. ‘Perhaps we’ll meet again.’ ‘I shouldn’t think so,’ said the man.
At this moment the bearded man, raising a hand, called out: ‘Good
day, Artur; good day, Jeremias!’ K. turned. So there were people out
and about on the village streets after all! Two young men were coming along the road from the castle. They were of medium height,
very lean, in close-ﬁtting clothes, and their faces too were very much
alike, with dark brown complexions setting oﬀ their very black goatee
beards. They were walking remarkably fast, considering the present
state of the roads, swinging their long legs in time. ‘What’s going
on?’ called the bearded man. He had to raise his voice to communicate with them, they were walking so fast, and didn’t stop. ‘We have
business here,’ they called back, laughing. ‘Where?’ ‘At the inn.’ ‘I’m
going there too,’ shouted K., his voice suddenly rising above all the
others. He very much wanted the two men to take him with them.
Striking up an acquaintance with them didn’t seem as if it would lead
anywhere much, but they would obviously be good, cheerful companions on a walk. However, although they heard what K. said, they
simply nodded, walked on, and were gone in a moment.
K. was left standing in the snow, feeling disinclined to haul his foot
out of it only to have it sink in again a little further on. The master
tanner and his friend, happy to be rid of K. at last, made their way
slowly back through the door of the house, which was only standing
ajar, still keeping an eye on him. K. was left alone in the all-enveloping
snow. ‘If I’d come here by chance and not on purpose,’ he thought,
‘I might fall into despair at this point.’
Then a tiny window opened in a cottage on his left. Closed, it had
looked dark blue, perhaps reﬂecting the snow, and it was so very tiny
that, now it had been opened, you couldn’t see the whole face of the
person behind it, only that person’s eyes: they were old, brown eyes.
‘There he is,’ K. heard a quavering female voice say. ‘It’s the land
surveyor,’ said a male voice. The man came to the window and asked,
in not-unfriendly tones, but as if anxious to make sure that all was
well with the street outside his house: ‘Who are you waiting for?’
‘I’m waiting for a sleigh that will give me a lift,’ said K. ‘There won’t
be any sleighs coming this way,’ said the man. ‘We don’t have traﬃc
here.’ ‘But this is the road to the castle,’ K. objected. ‘All the same,’
said the man, with a certain implacable note in his voice, ‘we don’t

have traﬃc here.’ Then they both fell silent. But the man was obviously thinking something over, for the window was still open and
smoke was pouring out of it. ‘It’s a bad road,’ said K., to help the
conversation along. However, all the man said was: ‘Yes, to be sure.’
After a while, however, he did add: ‘I’ll take you in my own sleigh if
you like.’ ‘Yes, please do,’ said K., delighted to hear it. ‘How much
will you ask?’ ‘Nothing,’ said the man, to K.’s great surprise. ‘Well,
you’re the land surveyor,’ he explained, ‘and you belong at the castle.
Where do you want to go?’ ‘Why, to the castle,’ K. was quick to say.
‘Oh, then I’m not going,’ the man said at once. ‘But I belong at the
castle,’ K. said, repeating the man’s own words. ‘Maybe,’ said the man
coldly. ‘Take me to the inn, then,’ said K. ‘Very well,’ said the man.
‘I’ll bring the sleigh round in a minute.’ None of this exchange sounded
particularly friendly; it was more like a kind of self-interested, anxious, pettily meticulous attempt to get K. away from where he was
standing in front of the man’s house.
The yard gate opened, and a small, ﬂat-bottomed sleigh appeared.
It was for carrying light loads, had no seat of any kind, and was
drawn by a feeble little horse, behind which the man came into view.
Although he wasn’t old he seemed feeble himself, he stooped and
walked with a limp, and his face was red, as if he had a cold. It
seemed particularly small because of a woollen scarf wrapped tightly
around his neck. The man was obviously sick, and had come out of
the house only to get K. away from here. K. said something to that
eﬀect, but the man dismissed it. All K. learned was that he was
Gerstäcker* the carrier, he had brought this uncomfortable sleigh
because it happened to be standing ready, and getting another one
would have taken too much time. ‘Sit down,’ he said, pointing to the
back of the sleigh with his whip. ‘I’ll sit beside you,’ said K. ‘I’m
going to walk,’ said Gerstäcker. ‘But why?’ asked K. ‘I’m going to
walk,’ repeated Gerstäcker, and then succumbed to a ﬁt of coughing
which shook him so badly that he had to brace his legs in the snow
and hold on to the side of the sleigh. K. said no more, but sat down
at the back of the sleigh, the man’s coughing gradually subsided, and
they started to move.
The castle up above, now curiously dark, the place that K. had
hoped to reach today, was retreating into the distance again. As if suggesting that this was only a temporary farewell, however, a bell rang
there with a lively, cheerful note, although the sound was painful too,

and made his heart quail momentarily as if threatened with getting
what it vaguely desired. But soon the clang of this great bell died
away, to be succeeded by the faint, monotonous sound of a smaller
bell, perhaps also up at the castle or perhaps in the village. Its note
was certainly a more suitable accompaniment to their slow progress
with the feeble but implacable driver.
‘You know,’ cried K. suddenly—they were already near the church,
the road to the inn was not far away, and K. thought he might venture
this remark—‘I’m very surprised to ﬁnd you willing to drive me on
your own responsibility. Is it allowed?’ Gerstäcker took no notice,
and continued to walk along beside the horse. ‘Hey!’ cried K., making a snowball from the snow on the sleigh and throwing it. It hit
Gerstäcker right on the ear. At this he did stop and turned, but when
K. saw him so close—the sleigh had moved a little further on—when
he saw the man’s bent form, as if physically mistreated, the red, narrow face with cheeks that somehow looked lopsided, one smooth and
the other fallen in, the almost toothless mouth constantly open as if
to help him listen better, he found he had to repeat what he had just
said in malice but this time with compassion, asking whether
Gerstäcker might be punished for giving K. a lift in his sleigh. ‘What
are you getting at?’ asked Gerstäcker blankly, but waiting for no
further explanation he called to the little horse and they moved on.
When they had almost reached the inn, which K. recognized by a
bend in the road, he saw to his surprise that the place was already
entirely dark. Had he been out so long? Only one or two hours, by
his calculations. And he had left in the morning, and had not felt
hungry since. Again, it had been full daylight until a little while ago,
and only now was it dark. ‘Short days, short days,’ he said to himself,
slipping oﬀ the sleigh and going towards the inn.
On the small ﬂight of steps up to the house he saw a welcome
sight: the landlord raising a lantern in the air and shining it in his
direction. Fleetingly remembering the carrier, K. stopped. There was
a cough somewhere in the darkness; that was him. Well, he’d probably be seeing him again soon. Only when he reached the top of the
steps, to be respectfully greeted by the landlord, did he see two men,
one on each side of the door. Taking the lantern from the landlord’s
hand, he shone it on the pair of them; they were the men he had
already met and who had been addressed as Artur and Jeremias. They
saluted him. Reminded of the happy days of his military service,

he laughed. ‘Well, so who are you?’ he asked, looking from one to the
other. ‘Your assistants,’ they replied. ‘That’s right, they’re the assistants,’ the landlord quietly conﬁrmed. ‘What?’ asked K. ‘Do you say
you’re my old assistants who were coming on after me and whom I’m
expecting?’ They assured him that they were. ‘Just as well, then,’
said K. after a little while. ‘It’s a good thing you’ve come. What’s
more,’ he added after another moment’s thought, ‘you’re extremely
late. That’s very remiss of you.’ ‘It was a long way,’ said one of them.
‘A long way?’ K. repeated. ‘But I saw you coming down from the
castle.’ ‘Yes,’ they agreed, without further explanation. ‘What have
you done with the instruments?’ asked K. ‘We don’t have any,’ they
said. ‘I mean the surveying instruments that I entrusted to you,’ said
K. ‘We don’t have any of those,’ they repeated. ‘What a couple you
are!’ said K. ‘Do you know anything about land surveying?’ ‘No,’ they
said. ‘But if you claim to be my old assistants, then you must know
something about it,’ said K. They remained silent. ‘Oh, come along,
then,’ said K., pushing them into the house ahead of him.

2
Barnabas
The three of them were sitting rather silently at a small table in the
saloon bar of the inn over their beer, K. in the middle, his assistants
to right and left of him. Otherwise there was only a table where some
of the local rustics sat, just as they had yesterday evening. ‘I’m going
to have a hard time with you two,’ said K., comparing their faces yet
again. ‘How am I to know which of you is which? The only diﬀerence
between you is your names, and apart from that’—he hesitated—
‘apart from that you’re as like as two snakes.’ They smiled. ‘Oh, other
people ﬁnd it easy to tell us apart,’ they said. ‘I believe you,’ said K.
‘I’ve seen that for myself, but then I have only my own eyes, and
I can’t distinguish between you with those. So I shall treat you as a
single man, and call you both Artur, which is the name of one of you—
you, perhaps?’ K. asked one of the assistants. ‘No,’ he said, ‘my name
is Jeremias.’ ‘Well, never mind that,’ said K, ‘I shall call you both
Artur. If I send Artur somewhere you’ll both go, if I give Artur a job
to do you’ll both do it, which from my point of view will be a disadvantage in that I can’t employ you on separate tasks, but also an
advantage because then I can hold you jointly responsible for everything I ask you to do. How you divide the work between you is all the
same to me, only you can’t make separate excuses. To me you’ll be
just one man.’ They thought this over and said: ‘We wouldn’t like
that at all.’ ‘Of course not,’ said K. ‘Naturally you’re bound to dislike
it, but that’s how it’s going to be.’ For some time, he had been watching one of the local rustics prowling around the table, and at last the
man made up his mind, went over to one of the assistants, and was
about to whisper something in his ear. ‘Excuse me,’ said K., slamming his hand down on the table and standing up, ‘these are my
assistants and we are in the middle of a discussion. No one has any
right to disturb us.’ ‘Oh, I see, I see,’ said the local man in some alarm,
walking backwards to rejoin his company. ‘I want you two to take
particular note of this,’ said K., sitting down again. ‘You may not
speak to anyone without my permission. I’m a stranger here, and if
you’re my old assistants then you are strangers here too. So we three

strangers must stick together. Let’s shake hands on it.’ They oﬀered
K. their hands only too willingly. ‘Well, never mind about those great
paws of yours,’ he said, ‘but my orders stand. I’m going to get some
sleep now, and I advise you to do the same. We’ve missed out on one
working day already, and work must start early tomorrow. You’d
better ﬁnd a sleigh to go up to the castle and be here outside the inn
with it at six in the morning, ready to leave.’ ‘Very well,’ said one of
the assistants. But the other objected. ‘Why say “very well”, when you
know it can’t be done?’ ‘Be quiet,’ said K. ‘I think you’re trying to
start distinguishing yourselves from each other.’ Now, however, the
assistant who had spoken ﬁrst said: ‘He’s right, it’s impossible. No
stranger may go up to the castle without a permit.’ ‘So where do we
have to apply for a permit?’ ‘I don’t know. Maybe to the castle warden.’
‘Then we’ll apply by telephone. Go and telephone the castle warden
at once, both of you.’ They went to the telephone, made the connection, crowding together eagerly and showing that outwardly they
were ridiculously ready to oblige, and asked whether K. might come
up to the castle with them next day. The reply was a ‘No’ that K. could
hear all the way over to his table, but the answer went on. It ran: ‘Not
tomorrow nor any other time either.’ ‘I’ll telephone myself,’ said K.,
rising to his feet. So far, apart from the incident with that one local
rustic, no one had taken much notice of K. and his assistants, but this
last remark of his aroused general attention. The whole company
stood up with K., and although the landlord tried to fend them oﬀ,
they crowded around him in a semicircle close to the telephone.
Most of them seemed to be of the opinion that K. wouldn’t get an
answer. K. had to ask them to keep quiet, telling them he didn’t want
to hear their views.
A humming, such as K. had never before heard on the telephone,
emerged from the receiver. It was as if the murmur of countless
childish voices—not that it was really a murmur, it was more like the
singing of voices, very very far away—as if that sound were forming,
unlikely as that might be, into a single high, strong voice, striking the
ear as if trying to penetrate further than into the mere human sense
of hearing. K. heard it and said nothing; he had propped his left arm
on the telephone stand, and listened like that.
He didn’t know just how long he stood there, but after a while the
landlord plucked at his coat and told him that someone had come
with a message for him. ‘Go away!’ cried K., angrily, perhaps into

the telephone, for now someone was answering at the other end, and
the following conversation took place. ‘Oswald speaking—who’s there?’
asked the speaker in a stern, haughty voice with a small speech defect
for which, as it seemed to K., he tried to compensate by dint of extra
severity. K. hesitated to give his name; he was powerless against the
telephone, leaving the other man free to shout at him and put down
the receiver. If that happened, K. would have cut himself oﬀ from
what might be a not-unimportant means of getting somewhere. K.’s
hesitation made the man impatient. ‘Who’s there?’ he repeated, adding, ‘I really would rather you lot down there didn’t do so much
telephoning. We had a call only a minute ago.’ Taking no notice of
this remark, K. came to a sudden decision and announced: ‘This is
the land surveyor’s assistant speaking.’ ‘What assistant? What land
surveyor?’ K. remembered yesterday’s conversation. ‘Ask Fritz,’ he
said brieﬂy. To his surprise, this worked. But over and beyond that,
he marvelled at the consistency among the people up there, for the
answer was: ‘Yes, yes, I know. That eternal land surveyor!* Yes, yes,
so what else? What assistant?’ ‘Josef,’ said K. He was slightly taken
aback by the way the locals were muttering behind him; obviously
they didn’t like to hear him giving a false name. But K. had no time
to bother about them, for the conversation called for all his attention.
‘Josef?’ came the answer. ‘No, the assistants are called’—here there
was a pause, while someone else was obviously consulted—‘are called
Artur and Jeremias.’ ‘Those are the new assistants,’ said K. ‘No,
they’re the old ones.’ ‘They are the new assistants, but I’m the old
one, and I came on later than the land surveyor and got here today.’
‘No,’ the other man replied, shouting now. ‘Who am I, then?’ asked
K., still keeping calm. And after a pause the same voice, with the
same speech defect, yet sounding like another and deeper voice,
commanding more respect, agreed: ‘You are the old assistant.’
K. was listening to the sound of the voice, and almost missed hearing the next question: ‘What do you want?’ He felt like slamming the
receiver down, expecting no more to come of this conversation. But
he was forced to reply at once: ‘When may my boss come up to the
castle?’ ‘Never,’ was the reply. ‘I see,’ said K., and he hung up.
The locals behind him had come very close now, and the assistants,
with many surreptitious glances at him, were busy keeping them
back. However, it seemed to be just for show, and the locals, satisﬁed
by the outcome of the conversation, slowly gave way. Then a man

walked through the group from behind it, dividing it in two, bowed
to K., and gave him a letter. Holding the letter in his hand, K. looked
at the messenger, who just now seemed to him more important than
the message itself. He greatly resembled the assistants; he was as
slender as they were, his clothes too were close-ﬁtting, he was nimble
and spry, and yet he was quite diﬀerent. K. would far rather have had
him as his assistant! The man reminded him a little of the woman
with the baby whom he had seen in the master tanner’s house. His
clothing was almost white and was probably not silk, but an ordinary
winter-weight fabric, yet it had the ﬁne look of a silk suit worn for
special occasions. His face was clear and open, his eyes very large.
His smile was extraordinarily cheering, and although he passed a
hand over his face, as if to wipe that smile away, he did not succeed.
‘Who are you?’ asked K. ‘My name is Barnabas,’* he said, ‘and I am
a messenger.’* His lips moved in a manly yet gentle way as he spoke.
‘How do you like it here?’ asked K., indicating the rustics, who were
still taking an interest in him. They were watching him with their
positively tormented faces—their skulls looked as if they had been
beaten ﬂat on top, and their features had contorted into an expression
of pain in the process—they were watching him with their thicklipped mouths open, and yet not watching either, for sometimes their
eyes wandered, lingering for a long time on some ordinary object
before returning to him. Then K. also pointed to the assistants, who
were holding each other close, cheek to cheek and smiling, whether
humbly or in derision it was hard to say. He indicated all these people
as if to introduce a retinue forced on him by special circumstances,
expecting—which implied familiarity, and that mattered to K. just
now—that Barnabas would see the diﬀerence between him and them.
But Barnabas did not respond to the question—although, as could
easily be seen, in all innocence—and let it pass him by, like a welltrained servant hearing his master say something that is only apparently addressed to him. He merely looked around as the question
required, greeting acquaintances among the locals with a wave of his
hand, and exchanged a few words with the assistants, all easily and as
a matter of course, without actually mixing with them. K., warned
oﬀ the subject but undeterred, turned back to the letter in his hand
and opened it. It ran as follows: ‘Dear Sir, you are, as you know,
taken into the count’s service. Your immediate superior is the village
mayor as chairman of the parish council, who will communicate to

you all further details concerning your work and your remuneration,
and to whom you will be answerable. Nonetheless, I will keep an eye
on you myself. Barnabas, the messenger who brings this letter, will
make enquiries of you from time to time, ﬁnd out what your requirements are, and impart them to me. You will ﬁnd me always ready to
oblige you as far as possible. I am anxious to have contented workers.’ The signature was illegible, but printed beside it were the words:
‘Chief Executive, Oﬃce X.’ ‘Wait a minute!’ said K. to Barnabas,
who was bowing to him, and he called to the landlord to show him
his room, saying he wanted to spend a little time alone studying this
letter. As he did so, he remembered that although he had taken to
Barnabas so much, he was only a messenger, and ordered him a beer.
He watched to see how he would take this; he was obviously pleased,
and drank it at once. Then K. went with the landlord. They had been
able to give him only a little attic room at the inn, which was a small
place, and even that had been diﬃcult, for two maids who had been
sleeping there before had to be accommodated elsewhere. In fact all
that had been done was to clear the maids out of the room, which
otherwise appeared unchanged, with no linen on the only bed and
just a couple of bolsters and a horse-blanket, left in the state it had
been in after last night, with a few pictures of saints and photographs
of soldiers on the walls. The room hadn’t even been aired; obviously
they hoped that the new guest would not stay long, and they were
doing nothing to keep him. But K. didn’t mind; he wrapped himself
in the blanket and began rereading the letter by the light of a candle.
It was not all of a piece; there were passages where he was
addressed as a free agent whose autonomy was recognized, for
instance in the opening greeting and the part about his requirements.
But then again, there were passages in the letter where he was openly
or by implication addressed as a common labourer, hardly worthy
even to be noticed by the chief executive of Oﬃce X, who obviously
felt he must make an eﬀort ‘to keep an eye on him’, while his superior, to whom he was actually ‘answerable’, was only the village
mayor, and perhaps his sole colleague would be the village policeman. These contradictions were certainly so blatant that they must
be intentional. Considering that the letter came from such an authority, K. scarcely even entertained the crazy idea that any indecision
might have entered into it. Rather, he saw himself oﬀered a choice:
it was left to him to make what he liked of the arrangements in this

letter, and decide whether he wanted to be a village worker who
seemed, but only seemed, to have the distinction of a link to the
castle, or apparently a village worker but one whose conditions of
work were really determined entirely by the message that Barnabas
had brought. K. did not hesitate to choose, nor would he have done
so even without his experiences so far. Only as a village worker as far
as possible from the gentlemen in the castle could he get anywhere
with the castle itself. These villagers, who were still so suspicious
of him, would start talking to him once he was, if not their friend,
at least one of them, indistinguishable from, say, Gerstäcker and
Lasemann—that must be brought about very soon, everything
depended on it—and then, he was sure, all paths would be open to
him, paths that would have been closed to him for ever, and not only
closed but invisible, if it had depended solely on the good graces of
the gentlemen up above. Of course there was a danger, and it was
suﬃciently emphasized in the letter, even represented with a certain
pleasure as if it were inevitable. It was that his was the status of a
labourer. ‘Service’, ‘superior’, ‘work’, ‘conditions of remuneration’,
‘answerable’, ‘workmen’: the letter was full of such terms, and even
when something else and more personal was said, it was written from
the same point of view. If K. wanted to work here then he could, but
if so it must be in deadly earnest, without so much as glancing elsewhere. K. knew that no real compulsion threatened him, he wasn’t
afraid of that, least of all here, but he did fear the force of his discouraging surroundings, he feared getting used to disappointment, he
feared the imperceptible inﬂuence of every passing moment—but he
must contend with that danger. The letter did not, after all, gloss
over the fact that if there were any disagreements it would be the
fault of K.’s recklessness—it was said with delicacy, and only an
uneasy conscience (uneasy, not guilty) would have noticed it in those
three words ‘as you know’, referring to his entering the employment
of the castle. K. had applied for the post, and now he knew that, as
the letter put it, he had been accepted into the count’s service.
K. took a picture oﬀ the wall and hung up the letter on the nail
instead. He would be living in this room, so this was where the letter
should hang.
Then he went down to the saloon bar of the inn. Barnabas and the
assistants were sitting at a little table. ‘Oh, there you are,’ said K. for
no special reason, just because he was glad to see Barnabas, who got

to his feet at once. No sooner had K. entered the room than the
rustics rose to come closer to him; it had become a habit of theirs
to follow him around. ‘What is it you keep wanting from me?’ cried K.
They did not take oﬀence, but turned slowly back to their places.
One said, by way of explanation as he turned away, but with an
inscrutable smile copied by some of the others in the saloon bar:
‘We’re always hearing something new,’ and he licked his lips as if
the ‘new’ was something delicious to eat. K. said not a word to
smooth things over; it would be good for them to feel a little respect
for him, but no sooner was he sitting beside Barnabas than he felt one
of the locals breathing down the back of his neck; the man said he had
come to fetch the salt-cellar, but K. stamped his foot angrily and he
went away without it. It was really easy to irritate K.; you would only
have to set the rustics against him, for instance, for the persistent
attention of some of them bothered him more than the reserve of
others. But the attitude of the former showed reserve too, for if K.
had sat down at their table, they would certainly have left it. Only
the presence of Barnabas kept him from making a scene. But still
he turned to them menacingly, and they had also turned to him.
However, when he saw them sitting like that, each in his place, without talking, without any visible connection with each other, the only
thing they had in common being that they were all staring at him, it
struck him that it might not be malice at all that made them pester
him, perhaps they really did want something from him but simply
could not say it, or then again it could be just childishness. This
seemed to be a great place for childishness. Wasn’t the landlord himself child-like as he held a glass of beer in both hands, taking it to one
of the guests? He stood still, looked at K., and failed to hear something that the landlady had called out to him from the kitchen hatch.
Feeling calmer, K. turned to Barnabas; he would have liked to get
the assistants out of the way, but could ﬁnd no pretext for ridding
himself of them, and in any case they were staring in silence at their
beer. ‘I’ve read the letter,’ said K. ‘Do you know what it says?’ ‘No,’
replied Barnabas. His glance seemed to convey more than his words.
Perhaps K. was mistaken in detecting goodwill in him as well as
malice in the rustics, but the messenger’s presence still made him
feel better. ‘The letter mentions you too. It says you are to carry messages between me and the chief executive, so that’s why I thought
you would know what was in it.’ ‘My orders’, said Barnabas, ‘were

simply to carry the letter, wait until it had been read, and if you think
it necessary take back an answer either oral or written.’ ‘Good’, said
K. ‘There’s no need to write; just tell the chief executive—what’s his
name, by the way? I couldn’t read the signature.’ ‘Klamm,’* said
Barnabas. ‘Then thank Mr Klamm on my behalf for my acceptance
and his particular kindness, which I know how to value as I ought,
not having proved my merits here yet. I will act entirely in accordance with his plans, and I have no particular requirements today.’
Barnabas, who had been listening attentively, asked if he could run
through that message out loud. K. said yes, Barnabas recited everything word for word. Then he rose to leave.
All this while K. had been scrutinizing his face, and now he did so
for the last time. Although Barnabas was about the same height as
K., he seemed to be looking down at him from above, but almost
humbly, although it was impossible to imagine him causing awkwardness to anyone. To be sure, he was only a messenger and did not
know the contents of the letter he had delivered, but his eyes, his
smile, his carriage seemed to be a message in themselves, even if he
didn’t know it. And K. oﬀered his hand, which clearly surprised
Barnabas, who had intended only to bow.
As soon as he had gone—before opening the door he had leaned
against it for a moment and looked around the room, with a glance
that was not meant for any particular person—as soon as he was
gone, K. told the assistants: ‘I’m going to fetch my drawings from my
room, and then we’ll discuss our ﬁrst job of work.’ They moved to
accompany him. ‘No, stay here,’ said K. They still wanted to go with
him, and K. had to repeat his order more sternly. Barnabas was no
longer out in the front hall, but he had only just left, for K. did not
see him outside the house, where new snow was falling. ‘Barnabas?’
he called. No answer. Could he still be inside the inn? There seemed
to be no other possibility. All the same, K. shouted his name at the top
of his voice, and it echoed through the night. At last a faint answer
came back from the distance—Barnabas was so far away already. K.
called him back, at the same time going towards him. They met
where they were out of sight of the inn.
‘Barnabas,’ said K., unable to keep a quiver out of his voice,
‘there’s something else I wanted to say to you. I’ll just point out that it’s
a poor arrangement if I have to rely on your coming by chance when
I need something from the castle. It’s not by chance that I’ve found

you now—and what speed you make; I thought you must still be in
the house!—but who knows how long I’d have had to wait for your
next appearance.’ ‘You can ask the chief executive for me always to
come at times of your choice,’ said Barnabas. ‘That wouldn’t do
either,’ said K. ‘Perhaps I might go for as long as a year without
wanting to send a message, and then there’d be something urgent
only quarter of an hour after you’d left.’ ‘Well, in that case,’ said
Barnabas, ‘shall I tell the chief executive that there should be some
other kind of link between him and you, not involving me?’ ‘No, no,’
said K., ‘deﬁnitely not, I just mention the matter in passing. This
time, fortunately, I was able to reach you.’ ‘Shall we go back to the
inn so that you can give me your new message there?’ said Barnabas.
He had already taken another step towards the building. ‘That’s not
necessary, Barnabas,’ said K. ‘I’ll walk part of the way with you.’
‘Why don’t you want to go to the inn?’ asked Barnabas. ‘The people
there bother me,’ said K. ‘You saw for yourself how importunate
those rustics are.’ ‘We can go to your room,’ said Barnabas. ‘It’s the
maids’ room,’ said K., ‘dirty and dismal; I wanted to walk a little way
with you so as not to have to stay there. Let’s link arms,’ added K. to
overcome his hesitation, ‘and then you’ll walk more securely.’ And
K. took his arm. It was quite dark, K. could not see his face, his
ﬁgure was indistinct, and he had already tried to touch his arm a little
while before.
Barnabas did as he wished, and they moved away from the inn.
Hard as he tried, K. found it diﬃcult to keep up with Barnabas, he
was impeding the other man’s freedom of movement, and in ordinary circumstances this little detail would surely lead to failure,
especially in the side-streets like the one where K. had sunk in the
snow that morning, and where he was only able to get along now with
the support of Barnabas. But he fended oﬀ such anxieties, and it
cheered him that Barnabas said nothing; if they went along in silence,
perhaps Barnabas too felt that just walking might be the point of
their keeping company.
And they were indeed walking on, but K. didn’t know where they
were going; he could make out nothing, and did not even know
whether they had passed the church yet. The diﬃculty he had in simply walking meant that he could not command his thoughts. Instead
of remaining ﬁxed on his goal, they became confused. Images of his
home kept coming back to him, and memories of it ﬁlled his mind.

There was a church in the main square there too, partly surrounded
by an old graveyard, which in turn was surrounded by a high wall.
Only a few boys had ever climbed that wall, and K. had so far failed
to do so. It was not curiosity that made them want to climb it; the
graveyard had no secrets from them, and they had often gone into it
through the little wrought-iron gate; it was just that they wanted to
conquer that smooth, high wall. Then one morning—the quiet,
empty square was ﬂooded with light; when had K. ever seen
it like that before or since?—he succeeded surprisingly easily. He
climbed the wall at the ﬁrst attempt, at a place where he had often
failed to get any further before, with a small ﬂag clenched between
his teeth. Little stones crumbled and rolled away below him as he
reached the top. He rammed the ﬂag into the wall, it ﬂapped in the
wind, he looked down and all around him, glancing back over his
shoulder at the crosses sunk in the ground. Here and now he was
greater than anyone. Then, by chance, the schoolteacher came by and,
with an angry look, made K. get down from the wall. As he jumped
he hurt his knee, and it was only with some diﬃculty that he got home,
but still he had been on top of the wall, and the sense of victory seemed
to him, at the time, something to cling to all his life. It had not been
entirely a foolish idea, for now, on this snowy night many years later,
it came to his aid as he walked on, holding Barnabas’s arm.
He held that arm more ﬁrmly; Barnabas was almost pulling him
along, and they preserved an unbroken silence. All K. knew about
the way they were going was that, judging by the state of the road
surface, they had turned into another side-alley. He resolved not to
be deterred from going on by any diﬃculty on the road, or indeed by
anxiety about ﬁnding his own way back; his strength would surely
hold out. And could this walk go on for ever? By day the castle had
seemed an easy place to reach, and a messenger from it was sure to
know the shortest way.
Then Barnabas stopped. Where were they? Didn’t their path go
any further? Was Barnabas going to say goodbye to him now? He
would not succeed. K. held Barnabas by the arm so tightly that it
almost hurt his own ﬁngers. Or could the incredible have happened,
and they were already in the castle or at its gates? But so far as K. was
aware they had not gone up any hill. Or had Barnabas led him along
a way that climbed only imperceptibly? ‘Where are we?’ K. asked
quietly, more to himself than his companion. ‘Home,’ said Barnabas

just as quietly. ‘Home?’ ‘Take care now, sir, mind you don’t slip.
This path goes downhill.’ Downhill? ‘It’s only a few steps,’ Barnabas
added, and he was already knocking at a door.
A girl opened it. They were standing in the doorway of a large
room, which was almost dark, for only one tiny oil-lamp hung over a
table to the left at the back of the room. ‘Who’s this with you, Barnabas?’
asked the girl. ‘The land surveyor,’ he said. ‘The land surveyor?’
repeated the girl in a louder voice, looking at the table. Two old
people sitting there rose to their feet, a man and a woman, and so did
another girl. They greeted K. Barnabas introduced them all to him:
they were his parents and his sisters Olga and Amalia. K. hardly
looked at them. They took his wet coat from him to dry it by the
stove, and K. let them do as they liked.
So they weren’t home, or rather only Barnabas was. But why were
they here? K. took Barnabas aside and asked: ‘Why did you come
here to your home? Or do you live in the castle precincts?’ ‘In the
castle precincts?’ repeated Barnabas, as if he didn’t understand K.
‘Barnabas,’ said K., ‘you were leaving the inn to go up to the castle.’
‘Oh no, sir,’ said Barnabas, ‘I was going home, I don’t go up to the
castle until morning. I never sleep there.’ ‘I see,’ said K. ‘You weren’t
going to the castle, only here.’ He felt that his smile was wearier and
he himself more insigniﬁcant. ‘Why didn’t you tell me so?’ ‘You didn’t
ask, sir,’ said Barnabas. ‘You only wanted to give me another message, but not in the saloon bar at the inn or in your room there, so
I thought you could give me the message here, at your leisure, at home
with my parents—they’ll all go away at once if you say so—and if
you like it better here with us you could spend the night. Did I do
wrong?’ K. could not reply. So it had been a misunderstanding, a
stupid, ordinary misunderstanding, and K. had swallowed it hook,
line, and sinker. He had let himself be captivated by the silken gleam
of Barnabas’s close-ﬁtting jacket, which he now unbuttoned, revealing a coarse, grey, much-mended shirt over a powerful broad chest
like a labourer’s. And everything around him was not only in harmony
with this sight but went further: the gouty old father who made his
way forward, more with the help of his groping hands than his slow,
stiﬀ legs; the mother with her arms crossed over her breast, so stout
that she too could take only the tiniest of steps. Both of them, father
and mother, had left their corner when K. entered the room, moving
towards him, and they were nowhere near him yet. The sisters, two

blondes, resembling both each other and Barnabas, but with harsher
features than their brother, were tall, strong girls. They stood near
the two new arrivals, expecting some kind of greeting from K., but
he couldn’t get out a word. He had been thinking that everyone here
in the village would matter to him, and no doubt that was so, but he
wasn’t interested in these particular people. If he had been able to
make his way back to the inn on his own, he would have set oﬀ at
once. Even the chance of getting into the castle with Barnabas in the
morning didn’t entice him.* He had wanted to get into the castle
now, by night and unnoticed, guided by Barnabas, but by Barnabas
as he had appeared to K. until now, a man more congenial to him than
anyone else he had yet seen here, and who, so he had also thought,
was closely connected with the castle, far more so than his visible
status might suggest. But it was impossible, a hopelessly ridiculous
plan, to try going up to the castle in full daylight arm in arm with the
son of this family, a family of which he, Barnabas, was entirely a part,
sitting with them now at their table, a man who, signiﬁcantly enough,
might not even sleep at the castle.
K. sat down on a window-seat, determined to spend the night there
and accept no further favours from the family. The villagers who
sent him away or seemed to fear him struck him as less dangerous,
for basically they were rejecting only his person while helping him to
concentrate his forces. Such apparent helpers as these, however,
putting on a little masquerade so as to take him to the bosom of their
family rather than the castle, were distracting him whether or not
they meant to, working to destroy his powers. He ignored a call inviting him to the family table and stayed where he was, his head bent.
Then Olga, the gentler of the two sisters and the one who showed a
touch of girlish awkwardness, came over to K. and again invited him
to join them; there was bread and bacon, she said, and she would go
to fetch some beer. ‘Where from?’ asked K. ‘Why, the inn,’ she said.
This was welcome news to K. He asked her to accompany him to the
inn, where he said he had left some important work, instead of going
to fetch beer. However, now it turned out that she didn’t intend to
go as far as the inn where he was staying, but to another and much
closer one, the Castle Inn. All the same, K. asked her to let him be
her companion; perhaps, he thought, there’ll be a bed for me there.
Whatever it was like, he’d have preferred it to the best bed in this
house. Olga did not reply at once, but looked at the table. Her brother,

standing there, nodded readily, and said: ‘Oh yes, if that’s what the
gentleman wants.’ This consent almost brought K. to withdraw his
request; if the man agreed to it, the idea must be worthless. But when
they discussed the question of whether K. would be allowed into the
inn, and everyone present doubted it, he insisted on going with Olga,
although without taking the trouble to invent some reasonable pretext for his request. This family must take him as he was, and it was
a fact that he felt no sense of shame in front of them. He was slightly
put oﬀ only by Amalia with her grave, direct gaze. Her expression
was unimpressed, but perhaps a little stupid too.
On the short walk to the inn—K. had taken Olga’s arm and, despite
himself, found that she was pulling him along very much as her
brother had done earlier—he learned that this inn was really meant
only for gentlemen from the castle, who ate and sometimes even spent
the night there when they had business in the village. Olga spoke to
K. quietly and as if she knew him well. It was pleasant to walk with
her, just as it had been pleasant with her brother. K. fought against
this sense of pleasure, but it was there.
Outwardly, the inn resembled the one where K. was staying. There
were probably no great outward diﬀerences in the whole village, but
he noticed small ones at once: the front steps had a handrail, there
was a handsome lantern over the door, and as they entered something ﬂuttered overhead: a banner in the count’s colours. They were
greeted at once in the front hall by the landlord, who was obviously
on his rounds keeping an eye on the place. His small eyes, enquiring
or sleepy, examined K. in passing, and he said: ‘The land surveyor’s
not allowed anywhere but the bar.’ ‘Of course,’ said Olga, answering
for K. ‘He’s just keeping me company.’ The ungrateful K., however,
let go of Olga’s arm and took the landlord aside, while Olga waited
patiently at the other end of the hall. ‘I’d like to spend the night
here,’ said K. ‘I’m afraid that’s impossible,’ replied the landlord.
‘You don’t seem to know that this inn is exclusively for the use of the
gentlemen from the castle.’ ‘Those may be the rules,’ said K., ‘but
surely you can ﬁnd me a corner to sleep in somewhere.’ ‘I’d be very
glad to oblige you,’ said the landlord, ‘but even apart from the strict
nature of the rules—and you speak of them very much like a stranger—
another reason why it’s impossible is that the gentlemen are extremely
sensitive, and I am sure they couldn’t tolerate the sight of a stranger,
or not without being prepared for it in advance. So if I were to let you

spend the night here, and by some chance—and chance is always on
the gentlemen’s side—you were discovered, not only would I be
ﬁnished but so would you. It may sound ridiculous, but it’s the
truth.’ This tall man, his coat tightly buttoned up, one hand leaning
on the wall, the other on his hip, his legs crossed, bending down to
K. slightly and speaking to him in a familiar tone, hardly seemed to
be one of the villagers, even if his dark clothes looked no better than
a local farmer’s Sunday best. ‘I believe every word you say,’ said K.,
‘and I don’t underestimate the importance of the rules, even if I may
have expressed myself clumsily. Let me just point out one thing:
I have valuable connections in the castle, and shall have some that are
even more valuable, and they will secure you against any risk you
might incur by my staying here, and guarantee that I’m in a position
to render all due thanks for a small favour.’ ‘I know that,’ said the
landlord, and he repeated it. ‘Yes, I know that.’ At this point K.
might have put his request more forcefully, but the landlord’s answer
took his mind oﬀ it, so he asked only: ‘Are there many gentlemen
from the castle staying here tonight?’ ‘As far as that goes, this is our
lucky day,’ said the landlord, almost as if tempting him. ‘We have
just the one gentleman staying here.’ K. still felt he couldn’t press
the landlord, but he hoped he was almost accepted, so he asked the
gentleman’s name. ‘Klamm,’ said the landlord casually, as he turned
to look for his wife, who came hurrying up in curiously shabby, oldfashioned, but ﬁne city clothes, laden with pleats and frills. She had
come to fetch the landlord, saying the chief executive wanted something. But before the landlord left he turned to K. again, as if not he
himself but K. must now decide whether he should spend the night
here. However, K. could say nothing; in particular, he was surprised
to discover that his own superior was staying here, and without being
able to explain it entirely to himself, he didn’t feel he could be as free
with Klamm as with the castle as a whole. Being found here by
Klamm would not have deterred K. in the way that the landlord
meant, but it would have been an embarrassing impropriety, rather
as if he were thoughtlessly planning to upset someone to whom he
owed gratitude. He was sorry, however, to see that such thoughts
obviously showed how he feared the consequences of being regarded
as an inferior, a common workman, and how he couldn’t dismiss his
fears even here, where they showed so clearly. So he stood where he
was, biting his lip and saying nothing. Once, before the landlord

disappeared through a doorway, he looked back at K., and K. looked
at him, and did not move from the spot until Olga came and led him
away. ‘What did you want to ask the landlord?’ asked Olga. ‘I wanted
to spend the night here,’ said K. ‘But you are spending the night
with us,’ said Olga in surprise. ‘Yes, of course,’ said K., leaving her
to take that whatever way she liked.

3
Frieda
In the bar, a large room entirely empty in the middle, several men
were sitting around the walls, near and on casks, but they looked
diﬀerent from the local rustics in K.’s inn. They were more neatly
dressed, all of them wearing clothes of the same coarse, greyishyellow fabric, their jackets ﬂared out, their trousers ﬁtted closely.
They were small men, very like each other at ﬁrst sight, with ﬂat,
bony, and yet round-cheeked faces. They were all quiet and hardly
moved, only their eyes followed the new arrivals in the room, but
slowly and with an expression of indiﬀerence. All the same, they
made a certain impression on K., perhaps because there were so
many of them and it was so quiet. He took Olga’s arm again, by way
of explaining his presence here to these people. A man in one corner,
evidently an acquaintance of Olga’s, rose to his feet and was going to
approach them, but K., who was arm in arm with her, turned her
away in a diﬀerent direction. No one but Olga herself could have
noticed, and she allowed it with a smiling sideways glance at him.
The beer was poured by a young woman called Frieda.* She was
a small blonde, rather insigniﬁcant, with a sad face and thin cheeks,
but with a surprising expression of conscious superiority in her eyes.
When they fell on K. it seemed to him that they had already discovered things about him of which he knew nothing, although that gaze
convinced him that they existed. K. kept on looking sideways at
Frieda, and still did so as she spoke to Olga. Olga and Frieda did not
seem to be great friends; they exchanged only a few cool words. K.
decided to help the conversation along, so he asked suddenly: ‘Do
you know Mr Klamm?’ Olga laughed out loud. ‘Why do you laugh?’
asked K., rather annoyed. ‘I’m not laughing,’ she said, but she still
laughed all the same. ‘Olga is a very childish girl,’ said K., leaning over
the bar counter to make Frieda look at him again. But she kept her
eyes lowered, and said quietly: ‘Would you like to see Mr Klamm?’
K. said he would, and she pointed to a door on her left. ‘There’s a
little peephole there; you can look through that.’ ‘And what about
these people?’ asked K. She pouted, thrusting out her lower lip, and

led K. over to the door with a hand that was very soft. Through the
small hole, which had obviously been made in it for purposes of observation, he could see almost the whole of the next room. Mr Klamm
was sitting at a desk in the middle of the room, in a comfortable
round armchair, brightly illuminated by an electric light-bulb hanging in front of him. He was a stout, ponderous man of middle height.
His face was still smooth, but his cheeks drooped slightly with the
weight of advancing age. He had a long, black moustache, and a pair
of pince-nez, set on his nose at a crooked angle and reﬂecting the
light, covered his eyes. If Mr Klamm had been sitting upright at the
desk K. would have seen only his proﬁle, but as he was turning away
from it K. saw him full-face. Klamm was resting his left elbow on the
desk, and his right hand, holding a Virginia cigarette, lay on his knee.
A beer glass stood on the desktop; as the desk had a raised rim K.
couldn’t see if there were papers of any kind on it, but he rather
thought it was empty. To make sure, he asked Frieda to look through
the hole and tell him. However, she had been in that room herself
only a little while ago, so she could assure K. without more ado that
there were no papers there. K. asked Frieda if he had to leave the
peephole now, but she said he could look through it as long as he
liked. Now K. was alone with Frieda, for Olga, as he soon saw, had
made her way over to her acquaintance and was perched on a cask,
swinging her feet in the air. ‘Frieda,’ said K. in a whisper, ‘do you
know Mr Klamm very well?’ ‘Oh yes,’ she said. ‘Very well.’ She leaned
close to K., and playfully adjusted her cream-coloured blouse, which,
as K. only now saw, was cut rather low at the neck; it was a neckline
which didn’t quite suit her meagre body. Then she said: ‘Don’t you
remember how Olga laughed?’ ‘Yes, she’s ill-mannered,’ said K.
‘Well,’ she said soothingly, ‘there really was something to laugh about.
You were asking if I knew Klamm, and as it happens I am’—here she
instinctively stood a little straighter, and K. once again felt the force
of her triumphant expression, which did not seem to connect at all
with what she was saying—‘as it happens I am his lover.’ ‘Klamm’s
lover,’ said K. She nodded. ‘Then,’ said K., smiling, so as to keep
their talk from getting too serious, ‘as far as I am concerned you are
someone worthy of respect.’ ‘And not just as far as you’re concerned,’
said Frieda in friendly tones, but without responding to his smile.
However, K. had a weapon to use against her pride, and he brought it
to bear by saying: ‘And have you ever been in the castle?’ But that did

not have the desired eﬀect, for she replied: ‘No, but isn’t it enough
that I’m here in the bar?’ She obviously had a raging thirst for praise,
and she seemed to want to slake it on K. ‘To be sure,’ said K., ‘here
in the bar you’re doing the landlord’s work for him.’ ‘So I am,’ she
said, ‘and I began as a dairymaid at the Bridge Inn.’ ‘With those soft
hands,’ said K., half questioning, and not sure himself whether he
was merely ﬂattering her or she had really made a conquest of him.
‘No one ever noticed them at the time,’ she said, ‘and even now—’
K. looked enquiringly at her, but she shook her head and would say
no more. ‘Of course you have your secrets,’ said K., ‘and you won’t
discuss them with someone you’ve known for only half an hour, and
who has had no chance to tell you anything about himself yet.’ But
that, it turned out, was the wrong thing to say; it was as if he had
woken Frieda from a slumber in which she liked him, for she took a
small piece of wood out of the leather bag that hung from her belt,
stopped up the peephole with it, and said to K., visibly forcing herself
not to let him see how her mood had changed: ‘As for you, I know
everything about you. You are the land surveyor.’ And she added:
‘But now I must get on with my work,’ and went back behind the
counter, while now and then one of the men here rose to have his
empty glass reﬁlled. K. wanted another quiet word with her, so he
took an empty glass from a stand and went over to her. ‘One more
thing, Miss Frieda,’ he said, ‘it’s extraordinary, and takes great
strength of mind, to work your way up from dairymaid to barmaid,
but is that the height of ambition for a person like you? No, what a
silly question. Your eyes—don’t laugh at me, Miss Frieda—speak
not so much of past struggles as of struggles yet to come. But there
are great obstacles in the world, they become greater the greater your
goals, and there’s nothing to be ashamed of in making sure you have
the help of a man who may be small and uninﬂuential, but is none the
less ready to ﬁght. Perhaps we could talk quietly some time, without
so many eyes watching us.’ ‘I don’t know what you’re after,’ she said,
and this time, against her will, her tone of voice spoke not of the
triumphs of her life but of its endless disappointments. ‘Are you by
any chance trying to take me away from Klamm? Good heavens!’
And she struck her hands together. ‘You see right through me,’ said
K., as if worn out by such distrust. ‘Yes, I secretly intended to do that
very thing. I wanted you to leave Klamm and become my lover
instead. Well, now I can go. Olga!’ cried K. ‘We’re going home.’

Olga obediently slid down from the cask, but she couldn’t get away
at once from her friends, as they surrounded her. Now Frieda said
quietly, with a dark glance at K.: ‘When can I speak to you?’ ‘Can
I stay the night here?’ asked K. ‘Yes,’ said Frieda. ‘Can I stay here
now?’ ‘You’d better go out with Olga so that I can get the men here
to leave. Then you can come back in a little while.’ ‘Good,’ said K.,
and waited impatiently for Olga. But the men here weren’t letting
her go; they had invented a dance with Olga at its centre. They
danced in a circle, and whenever they all uttered a shout in unison
one of them went up to her, put one hand ﬁrmly around her waist,
and whirled her about several times. The round dance became faster
and faster, the raucous, avid shouting gradually merged into what
was almost a single cry. Olga, who had tried to break through the
circle earlier, smiling, was now staggering from one man to another,
with her hair coming down. ‘The kind of people they send me here!’
said Frieda, biting her thin lips in annoyance. ‘Who are they?’ asked
K. ‘Klamm’s servants,’ said Frieda. ‘He always brings them with him,
and their presence upsets me. I hardly know what I was discussing
with you just now, Mr Land Surveyor, and if there was anything
wrong in it you must forgive me. I blame it on the company here,
they are the most contemptible and repulsive people I know, and
here am I, obliged to ﬁll up their beer glasses. How often I’ve asked
Klamm to leave them behind! I have to put up with other gentlemen’s servants too—he might think of me for once, but whatever
I say it’s no use, an hour before he arrives they come barging in like
cattle into the cowshed. And now they really must go to the stables
where they belong. If you weren’t here I’d open that door and
Klamm himself would have to drive them out.’ ‘Doesn’t he hear
them, then?’ asked K. ‘No,’ said Frieda. ‘He’s asleep.’ ‘What!’ cried
K. ‘Asleep? When I looked into the room he was awake and sitting at
the desk.’ ‘He’s still sitting there like that,’ said Frieda. ‘He was already
asleep when you saw him—would I have let you look in otherwise?
That’s the position he sleeps in, the gentlemen sleep a great deal, it’s
hard to understand. Then again, if he didn’t sleep so much, how
could he stand those men? Well, I’ll have to chase them out myself.’
And picking up a whip* from the corner, she took a single awkward
leap high into the air, rather like a lamb gambolling, and made for the
dancers. At ﬁrst they turned to her as if she were a new dancer joining them, and indeed, for a moment it looked as if Frieda would drop

the whip, but then she raised it again. ‘In the name of Klamm,’ she
cried, ‘out into the stables, all of you, out into the stables.’ Now they
saw that she was serious, and in a kind of terror that K. couldn’t
understand, they began crowding away to the back of the room.
A door was pushed open by the ﬁrst to get there, night air blew in,
and they all disappeared with Frieda, who was obviously driving
them across the yard to the stables. However, in the sudden silence
K. heard footsteps in the corridor. For the sake of his own safety he
went round behind the bar counter. The only possible place to hide
was underneath it. He had not, to be sure, been forbidden to stay in
the bar, but as he was planning to spend the night here he didn’t want
to be seen now. So when the door really was opened, he got under
the counter. Of course there was a danger of being discovered there
too, but he could always say he had hidden from the boisterous servants, which was a not improbable excuse. It was the landlord who
came in. ‘Frieda!’ he called, pacing up and down the room several
times. Luckily Frieda soon came back and did not mention K., but
just complained of the common people here, and went round behind
the bar in her attempt to ﬁnd K., who managed to touch her foot.
Now he felt sure of himself. Since Frieda did not mention K., in the
end the landlord had to. ‘So where’s the land surveyor?’ he asked. In
fact he was a courteous man, whose manners had beneﬁted by constant and relatively free intercourse with those of much higher rank
than himself, but he spoke to Frieda with particular respect, which
was all the more noticeable because during their conversation he was
still very much an employer talking to a member of his staﬀ, and a
very impertinent one at that. ‘I’d quite forgotten the land surveyor,’
said Frieda, planting her small foot on K.’s chest. ‘He must have left
long ago.’ ‘But I never saw him,’ said the landlord, ‘and I was out in
the front hall almost all the time.’ ‘Well, he isn’t here,’ said Frieda
coolly, pressing her foot down harder on K. There was something
cheerful and easygoing in her demeanour which K. hadn’t noticed at
all before, and now, improbably, it gained the upper hand as she
suddenly bent down to K., smiling and saying: ‘Maybe he’s hidden
down here.’ She quickly kissed him and then popped up again, saying
regretfully: ‘No, he isn’t here.’ The landlord too sprang a surprise by
saying: ‘I don’t like it at all, I wish I knew for certain whether he’s
gone. It’s not just because of Mr Klamm, it’s because of the rules.
And the rules apply to you, Miss Frieda, just as they do to me. You stay

here in the bar, I’ll search the rest of the house. Goodnight, and sleep
well!’ He had hardly left the room when Frieda turned oﬀ the electric
light and joined K. under the bar. ‘My darling! My sweet darling!’
she whispered, but she did not touch K. She lay on her back as if
swooning with desire, and spread her arms wide. Time must have
seemed endless to her in her amorous bliss, and she sighed rather
than sang a little song of some kind.* Then she took alarm, for K.
remained quiet, lost in thought, and she began tugging at him like a
child. ‘Come on, I’m stiﬂing down here.’ They embraced one another,
her little body burned in K.’s hands, they rolled, in a semi-conscious
state from which K. tried constantly but unsuccessfully to surface, a
little way on, bumped into Klamm’s door with a hollow thud, then
lay there in the puddles of beer and the rubbish* covering the ﬂoor.
Hours passed as they lay there, hours while they breathed together
and their hearts beat in unison, hours in which K. kept feeling that
he had lost himself, or was further away in a strange land than anyone had ever been before, a distant country where even the air was
unlike the air at home, where you were likely to stiﬂe in the strangeness of it, yet such were its senseless lures that you could only go on,
losing your way even more. So it was not a shock to him, at least at
ﬁrst, but a cheering sign of dawn when a voice from Klamm’s room
called for Frieda in a deep, commanding, but indiﬀerent tone. ‘Frieda,’
said K. in Frieda’s ear, alerting her to the summons. In what seemed
like instinctive obedience, Frieda was about to jump up, but then she
remembered where she was, stretched, laughed quietly, and said:
‘I won’t go, I’m never going back to him.’ K. was about to argue and
urge her to go to Klamm, and he began to look for what remained of
her blouse, but he couldn’t get the words out, he was too happy to
have Frieda in his hands, happy but fearful too, for it seemed to him
that if Frieda left him he would lose all he possessed. And as if K.’s
consent had given her strength, Frieda clenched her ﬁst, knocked on
the door with it, and called: ‘I’m with the land surveyor! I’m with the
land surveyor!’ At this Klamm fell silent. But K. got up, knelt down
beside Frieda, and looked around him in the dim light that comes
before dawn. What had happened? Where were his hopes? What could
he expect of Frieda now that all was revealed? Instead of making very
cautious progress, with his rival’s stature and the greatness of his
own goal in mind, he had spent a whole night here rolling about in
puddles of beer. The smell of the beer dazed him. ‘What have you

done?’ he asked quietly. ‘We’re both lost.’ ‘No,’ said Frieda, ‘I’m the
one who’s lost, but I’ve gained you. Calm down, see how those two
are laughing.’ ‘Who?’ asked K., and turned. On the bar counter sat
his two assistants, looking as if they hadn’t slept well but were still
cheerful. It was the cheerfulness that comes from doing your duty
punctiliously. ‘What do you want here?’ cried K., as if they were to
blame for everything, and he looked round for the whip that Frieda
had used yesterday evening. ‘We had to go looking for you,’ said the
assistants, ‘and since you didn’t come back to us at the inn we tried
Barnabas’s house and ﬁnally found you here. We’ve been sitting here
all night. Being your assistants isn’t an easy job.’ ‘I need you by day,
not by night,’ said K. ‘Go away!’ ‘It’s day now,’ they said, and stayed
put. In fact it really was day, the doors into the yard were opened and
the servants came pouring in with Olga, whom K. had quite forgotten.
Olga was as lively as she had been yesterday evening, untidy as her
hair and clothes were, and even in the doorway her eyes sought K.
‘Why didn’t you take me home?’ she asked, almost in tears. ‘For the
sake of a woman like that!’ she answered herself, repeating it several
times. Frieda, who had disappeared for a moment, came back with a
small bundle of clothes, and Olga stepped sadly aside. ‘We can go
now,’ said Frieda, and it was obvious that she meant they should go
to the Bridge Inn. They formed a little procession, K. leading the
way with Frieda and the assistants following. The gentleman’s servants showed evidence of great dislike for Frieda, understandably,
since she had been so stern and domineering with them earlier. One
even took his stick and acted as if he wasn’t going to let her pass
unless she jumped over it, but a glance from her was enough to deter
him. Out in the snow, K. breathed a sigh of relief. The pleasure of
being out of doors was so great that it made the diﬃculty of the path
tolerable this time, and if K. had been alone it would have been even
better. On reaching the inn he went straight to his room and lay
down on the bed, Frieda made herself a bed on the ﬂoor beside it,
and the assistants, who had come in with them, were turned out, but
then they came back through the window. K. was too tired to send
them away again. The landlady came up specially to welcome Frieda,
who called her ‘dear little mother’, and their meeting was a baﬄingly
warm aﬀair, with much kissing and hugging. There was certainly
little peace and quiet in the small room, and the maids often came
trudging in, wearing men’s boots, to fetch or remove something.

If they needed some item of theirs from the bed, which was stuﬀed
full of all sorts of things, they unceremoniously pulled it out from
under K. They spoke to Frieda as one of themselves. In spite of all
this bustle, K. stayed in bed all day and all night. Frieda did him
various small services. When he ﬁnally got up the next morning, feeling very much refreshed, it was already the fourth day* since he had
arrived in the village.

4
First Conversation with the Landlady
He would have liked to speak to Frieda in private about the assistants. She laughed and joked with them now and then, but their mere
intrusive presence troubled him. Not that they were demanding;
they had settled down on the ﬂoor in a corner of the room, lying on
two old skirts; their aim, as they often assured Frieda, was to avoid
disturbing their boss the land surveyor, and to take up as little room
as possible. They made various attempts to achieve that end, although
with much chuckling and whispering, by folding their arms and legs
and huddling together, so that in the twilight all you could see in
their corner was a large and indeterminate tangled mass. None the
less, K.’s daylight experiences showed him that they were observing
him very attentively and constantly staring at him, whether they
made telescopes of their hands in an apparently childish game and
played similar nonsensical tricks, or just looked his way while they
devoted most of their attention to the care of their beards, of which
they thought a great deal, each comparing his with the other’s time
and again for length and profusion, and getting Frieda to judge
between them. K. often watched the three of them with complete
indiﬀerence from his bed.
When he felt strong enough to leave it, they all came hurrying to
serve him. Much as he might defend himself against their attentions,
he had not yet recovered entirely. He noticed that when he realized
that he was to some extent dependent on them, so he had to let them
do as they pleased. And it was not so very unpleasant to drink the
good coﬀee that Frieda had brought to his table, or to warm himself
by the stove that Frieda had lit, to make the eager, if clumsy, assistants run up and down stairs ten times to fetch water for washing,
soap, a comb and a mirror, and ﬁnally, because K. had expressed a
quiet wish that might possibly indicate that he wanted it, a small
glass of rum.
In the middle of all this ordering them about and being served, K.
said, more in an easygoing mood than with any real hope of success:
‘Go away, you two, I don’t need anything more just now, and I’d like

to talk to Miss Frieda alone.’ And on seeing no actual opposition to
this idea in their faces, he added, to make it up to them: ‘And then
the three of us will go and see the village mayor. Wait for me in the
saloon downstairs.’ Curiously enough, they obeyed, except that before
leaving the room they said: ‘We could always wait here.’ To which
K. replied: ‘I know, but I don’t want you to.’
It was annoying, and yet in a way K. was also glad of it, that when
Frieda came to sit on his lap as soon as the assistants had gone, she
said: ‘What do you have against the assistants, darling? We needn’t
keep any secrets from them. They’re good, faithful souls.’ ‘Oh, faithful!’ said K. ‘Watching me all the time. It’s pointless, it’s horrible.’
‘I think I understand you,’ she said, putting her arms around his
neck, and she was about to say something else but could not go on.
The chair on which they were sitting was close to the bed, and they
staggered over to the bed and fell on it. There they lay, although not
as absorbed in each other as on their ﬁrst night together. She was in
search of something and so was he, they tried to get at it almost
angrily, grimacing, butting each other’s breasts with their heads,
and their embraces and writhing bodies did not bring oblivion but
reminded them of their duty to go on searching. Like dogs desperately scraping at the ground, they worked away at one another’s bodies, helplessly disappointed as they tried to retrieve the last of their
bliss, sometimes licking each other’s faces with their tongues. Only
weariness brought them to lie still, feeling gratitude to each other.
Then the maids came upstairs. ‘Oh, just look at them lying here,’
said one of the maids, and in her kindness threw a length of cloth
over them.
When K. freed himself from the cloth later and looked around, the
assistants were back in their corner, which did not surprise him, and
were warning each other to preserve a serious demeanour, pointing
to K. and saluting—but in addition the landlady was sitting beside
the bed knitting a stocking. The ﬁddly little job didn’t seem to suit
her huge ﬁgure, which almost blotted out the light. ‘I’ve been waiting
a long time,’ she said, and raised her broad face, which had many of
the lines of old age on it, but in its vast size was still smooth and might
once have been beautiful. Her words sounded like an accusation,
which was unfair, for K. hadn’t asked her to come. So he merely nodded his head in acknowledgement, and sat up. Frieda got up too, left
K., and went to lean against the landlady’s armchair. ‘Madam,’ said

K. fretfully, ‘couldn’t you put oﬀ whatever it is you want to say until
I come back from seeing the village mayor? I have an important
meeting with him.’ ‘Mr Land Surveyor, this is more important, take
my word for it,’ said the landlady. ‘Your meeting is probably just
about some job or other to be done, but I’m concerned with a human
being, my dear maid Frieda here.’ ‘Oh,’ said K., ‘well then, yes,
though I don’t know why you can’t leave our own aﬀairs to the two
of us.’ ‘Out of love, out of concern, that’s why,’ said the landlady,
drawing Frieda’s head to her. As the girl stood there, she came only
up to the seated landlady’s shoulder. ‘Since Frieda has such faith in
you,’ said K., ‘there’s nothing I can do about that. And as Frieda only
recently called my assistants faithful, then we’re all friends together.
So I can tell you, madam, that I think the best thing would be for
Frieda and me to get married, and very soon too. Sad to say, very sad
to say, I won’t be able to compensate Frieda for what she has lost
through me: her position at the Castle Inn and the friendship of
Klamm.’ Frieda looked up. Her eyes were full of tears, and there was
no expression of triumph in them. ‘Why me? Why was I chosen?’
‘Why?’ asked K. and the landlady at the same time. ‘She’s confused,
poor child,’ said the landlady. ‘Bewildered by too much happiness
and unhappiness coming all at once.’ And as if to conﬁrm what the
landlady had said, Frieda now ran to K., kissed him wildly as if there
were no one else in the room, and then fell on her knees in front of
him weeping, and still embracing him. As K. stroked Frieda’s hair
with both his hands, he said to the landlady: ‘You seem to agree with
me?’ ‘You’re an honourable man,’ said the landlady, and her own
voice sounded tearful. She looked a little weary, and was breathing
heavily, but she found the strength to say: ‘Now, there are certain
assurances that you must give Frieda, for much as I respect you,
you’re a stranger here, you can’t call on anyone to vouch for you, we
don’t know your domestic circumstances, so assurances are necessary, as I am sure you will realize, my dear sir. You yourself have
pointed out how much Frieda stands to lose by throwing in her lot
with yours.’ ‘Of course, assurances, naturally,’ said K. ‘They’d better
be made in front of a notary, I expect, but perhaps some of the
count’s authorities will want to be involved as well. What’s more,
there is something else I absolutely must do before the marriage.
I must speak to Klamm.’ ‘That’s impossible,’ said Frieda, straightening up slightly and pressing close to K. ‘What an idea!’ ‘But it must

be done,’ said K. ‘If it’s impossible for me to arrange it, then you
must.’ ‘I can’t, K., I can’t,’ said Frieda. ‘Klamm will never speak to
you. How can you imagine that Klamm would speak to you?’ ‘Well,
would he speak to you?’ asked K. ‘He wouldn’t speak to me either,’
said Frieda. ‘He wouldn’t speak to either you or me, it’s downright
impossible.’ She turned to the landlady with her arms outspread.
‘There, ma’am, you see what he asks.’ ‘You’re a strange man, sir,’ said
the landlady, and she looked rather alarming as she sat there very
upright, with her legs spread and her mighty knees showing beneath
her ﬂimsy skirt. ‘You want the impossible.’ ‘Why is it impossible?’
asked K. ‘I’ll explain,’ said the landlady, in a tone suggesting that by
explaining she was not doing K. a ﬁnal favour but inﬂicting his ﬁrst
punishment on him. ‘I will be happy to explain to you. I do not belong
to the castle, to be sure, I am only a woman, I am only the landlady
of the lowest kind of inn—well, not quite the lowest kind, but not so
very far from it—so maybe you won’t set much store by my explanation, but I have kept my eyes open all my life, I have met a great
many people, and I have borne the whole burden of running this inn
on my own, for my husband may be a good young fellow, but he’s no
landlord, and he will never understand the meaning of responsibility.
You, for instance, owe it only to his carelessness—I was tired to
death the other evening—that you are here in the village at all, sitting on that bed in peace and comfort.’ ‘What do you mean?’ cried
K., emerging from a certain mood of abstraction, but aroused from
it more by curiosity than by anger. ‘You owe it only to his carelessness,’ repeated the landlady, pointing her foreﬁnger at K. Frieda
tried to mollify her. ‘What do you expect?’ the landlady asked Frieda,
with a swift turn of her whole body. ‘The land surveyor here has asked
me a question, and I must answer him. How else is he to understand
what we ourselves take for granted, which is that Mr Klamm will
never speak to him—and why do I say “will”? He never can speak to
him. Listen, sir, Mr Klamm is a gentleman from the castle, which in
itself, quite apart from Klamm’s position in any other respect, means
that he is of high rank. But what about you, whose agreement to
marry Frieda we are so humbly soliciting here? You’re not from the
castle, you’re not from the village, you’re nothing. Unfortunately,
however, you are a stranger, a superﬂuous person getting in everyone’s way, a man who is always causing trouble—why, the maids
have had to move out of their room on your account—a man whose

intentions are unknown, a man who has seduced dear little Frieda
and whom, unfortunately, we must allow to marry her. Basically I
don’t blame you for all this; you are what you are. I’ve seen too much
in the course of my life to be unable to tolerate this sight too. But
think what you are really asking. You expect a man like Klamm to
speak to you. I was sorry to hear that Frieda let you look through the
peephole; you’d already seduced her when she did that. Tell me, how
did you bear the sight of Klamm? You needn’t answer that, I know,
you bore it very well. You are in no position to see Klamm properly,
and that’s not arrogance on my part, because I am in no position to
do so either. You want Klamm to speak to you, but he doesn’t even
speak to the villagers, he himself has never spoken to anyone from
the village. It was Frieda’s greatest distinction, a distinction that will
be my pride to my dying day, that at least he used to call her by
name, and she could speak to him as she liked, and had permission
to use the peephole, although he never really spoke to her either. And
the fact that he sometimes called for Frieda doesn’t necessarily have
the importance with which you might wish to endow it, he simply
called Frieda by name—who knows his intentions?—and the fact
that Frieda, of course, came hurrying up was her own business. Well,
it was due to Klamm’s kindness that she was allowed in to see him
without any trouble, but you couldn’t say he actually summoned her
to him. And what’s gone is certainly gone for ever. Perhaps Klamm
will call for Frieda by name again, yes, that’s possible, but she certainly won’t be allowed in to see him any more—not a girl who has
given herself to you. And there’s one thing, just one thing that I can’t
get my poor head around, which is how a girl said to be Klamm’s
lover—although personally I consider that a greatly exaggerated
description—would so much as let you touch her.’
‘Remarkable, to be sure,’ said K., and he took Frieda, who complied
at once, although lowering her head, to sit on his lap. ‘But I think it
shows that not everything is exactly as you think. For instance, yes, I
am sure you’re right when you say that I am nothing compared to
Klamm, and if I now demand to speak to Klamm and even your explanation does not dissuade me, it doesn’t mean that I am in a position to
bear the sight of Klamm without so much as a door between us, or that
I might not run out of the room when he appeared. But as I see it, such
a fear, though it might be justiﬁed, is no reason not even to try the
venture. If I succeed in standing up to him, then it’s not necessary for

him to speak to me; I will be satisﬁed by seeing what impression my
words make on him, and if they make none, or he doesn’t listen at all,
then it’s to my advantage to have spoken freely in front of a powerful
man. But you, madam, with all your knowledge of life and human
nature, and Frieda here, who was still Klamm’s lover yesterday—I see
no reason to avoid that word myself—can surely get me an opportunity to speak to Klamm easily enough. If it’s not possible in any other
way, then at the Castle Inn. Perhaps he may still be there today.’
‘It is not possible,’ said the landlady, ‘and I see that you lack the
ability to understand that. But tell me, what do you want to speak to
Klamm about?’
‘Why, Frieda, of course,’ said K.
‘Frieda?’ asked the landlady, baﬄed, and turned to Frieda herself.
‘Did you hear that, Frieda? He—this man—he wants to speak to
Klamm, Klamm of all people, about you.’
‘Oh dear,’ said K. ‘You are such a clever woman, madam, and so
awe-inspiring too, yet every little thing frightens you. Well, if I want
to speak to him about Frieda that’s not such a monstrous idea, it is
perfectly natural. For you are certainly mistaken if you think that
from the moment when I appeared Frieda became of no importance
to Klamm. You underestimate him if you believe that. I realize that
it is presumptuous of me to try putting you right there, but I must
do it. I can’t have caused any change in Klamm’s relationship with
Frieda. Either there was no real relationship—as those who would
deprive Frieda of the honourable title of being his lover say—in
which case there is none now, or there was such a relationship, but if
so how could it be wrecked by me, a man who, as you rightly say, is
nothing in Klamm’s eyes? Such things may be believed in the ﬁrst
moment of shock, but even the slightest reﬂection is sure to put that
right. Why don’t we let Frieda say what she thinks about it?’
With her eyes looking into the distance, her cheek against K.’s
breast, Frieda said: ‘I am sure it is just as my little mother says:
Klamm won’t want to know any more about me. But not because you
turned up, darling, nothing of that kind could have troubled him. In
fact I think it is his doing that we came together under the bar—
blessings and not curses on that hour.’ ‘If that’s the case—’ said K.
slowly, for Frieda’s words were sweet, and he closed his eyes for a
few seconds to let them sink in: ‘if that’s the case there is even less
reason to fear an interview with Klamm.’

‘Really,’ said the landlady, as if looking down at K. from above,
‘you sometimes remind me of my husband, you’re just as contrary
and childish. You spend a few days here, and already you think you
know better than those who were born in the village, better than me,
old woman that I am, better than Frieda who has seen and heard so
much at the Castle Inn. I don’t deny that it may be possible to do
something that transgresses the rules and the good old customs,
I have never known anything of the kind myself, but there are said to
be instances, although it certainly isn’t done in the way you would set
about it, by saying no, no, all the time, relying on your own mind and
ignoring advice, however well intended. Do you think I’m anxious
on your behalf ? Did I bother about you while you were on your own?
Although if I had, it might have been a good idea, and much of this
might have been avoided. All I said to my husband about you at the
time was: “Keep well away from him.” And I would have felt the
same today if Frieda hadn’t been dragged into your own fate. It’s to
her, whether you like it or not, that you owe my concern, even my
consideration for you. And you can’t simply dismiss me, because you
are strictly responsible to me, as the only person who watches over
little Frieda with maternal care. It’s possible that Frieda is right and
everything that has happened is what Klamm wants, but I don’t
know anything about Klamm, I will never speak to him, he is entirely
beyond my reach. But you sit here, keeping your hold on my Frieda,
and—why deny it?—you will be kept here by me. Yes, kept by me,
for young man, if I turn you out of this house, you just try ﬁnding
accommodation anywhere in the village, even in a dog kennel.’
‘Well, thank you very much,’ said K., ‘this is plain speaking indeed,
and I believe every word you say. Then my position is extremely
insecure, and so is Frieda’s too.’
‘No,’ cried the landlady furiously. ‘In that respect Frieda’s position has nothing to do with yours. Frieda belongs to my household,
and no one has any right to call her position here insecure.’
‘Very well, very well,’ said K. ‘I’ll agree that you are right in that
too, especially since, for reasons unknown to me, Frieda seems too
much afraid of you to join in our discussion. So let’s stick to me for
the time being. My position is very insecure, you don’t deny that,
indeed you go to great lengths to prove it. However, as with everything you say, that statement is largely but not entirely correct. For
instance, I know where I could have a very good bed for the night.’

‘Where? Where?’ cried Frieda and the landlady at the same time,
as avidly as if they had the same reasons for asking.
‘At Barnabas’s house,’ said K.
‘With those villains!’* cried the landlady. ‘Those infernal villains!
At Barnabas’s house! Did you hear that?’ she asked, turning to the
assistants’ corner, but they had left it long ago and were standing arm
in arm behind the landlady, who now seized the hand of one of them
as if she needed support. ‘Did you hear where this gentleman goes?
To Barnabas and his family! Yes, I’m sure he can have a bed for the
night there—oh, if only he’d preferred it to the Castle Inn. But
where were you two?’
‘Madam,’ said K. before the assistants could answer, ‘these are my
assistants. You treat them as if they were my guards instead, and your
assistants. I’m prepared at least to discuss your opinions civilly in all
other respects, but not when it comes to my assistants, where the
situation is only too clear. So I will request you not to speak to my
assistants, and if my request to you is not enough, then I will forbid
my assistants to answer you.’
‘So I’m not allowed to speak to you!’ said the landlady to the
assistants, and they all three laughed, the landlady with derision but
much more quietly than K. had expected, the assistants as they
usually did, in a meaningful kind of way yet meaning nothing, just
disclaiming any responsibility.
‘Oh, don’t be angry,’ said Frieda. ‘You must understand our
alarm. We owe it all to Barnabas, if you like, that you and I belong to
each other now. When I ﬁrst saw you in the bar—you arrived arm in
arm with Olga—I knew a little about you, but on the whole you were
a matter of perfect indiﬀerence to me. And not just you; everything,
everything was a matter of indiﬀerence to me. I was dissatisﬁed with
a good deal at the time, and there was a good deal that annoyed me
too, but what kind of dissatisfaction and annoyance was that? For
instance, one of the guests in the bar insulted me—they were always
after me, you saw those fellows, but then much worse came in too,
Klamm’s servants weren’t the worst of them—well, one of them did
insult me, but what did I care for that? I felt as if it had happened
years ago, or as if it hadn’t happened at all, or as if I had only heard
tell of it, or had already forgotten it. But oh, I can’t describe it,
I can’t even imagine it, that’s how everything has changed since
Klamm left me.’

And Frieda broke oﬀ her story, bowed her head sadly, and folded
her hands in her lap.
‘There, you see,’ cried the landlady, as if she were not speaking
herself but merely lending her voice to Frieda, to whom she now
moved closer until she was sitting right beside her, ‘there, Mr Land
Surveyor, you see the consequences of your actions, and your assistants, whom I’m not allowed to speak to, may see them too and learn
from them. You have torn Frieda away from the happiest situation
she was ever in, and it happened mainly because, going too far in her
childish pity for you, Frieda couldn’t bear to see you arm in arm with
Olga, delivered up to Barnabas’s family. She saved you, sacriﬁcing
herself in the process. And now that it’s done, and Frieda has
exchanged all she had for the happiness of sitting on your knee, now
you come along and play your great trump card, which is the fact that
you once had the opportunity of spending the night at Barnabas’s
house. I suppose you’re trying to prove that you are independent of
me. To be sure, if you really had spent the night with Barnabas, you
would be so independent of me that you’d have to leave my house
this minute, and in a great hurry too.’
‘I don’t know what sins Barnabas and his family have committed,’
said K., while he carefully raised Frieda, who seemed almost lifeless,
placed her slowly on the bed, and rose to his feet. ‘Perhaps you’re right
there, but certainly I was right when I asked you to leave our business,
Frieda’s and mine, to the two of us alone. You mentioned just now
something about love and concern, but I haven’t seen a lot of either of
those; instead I’ve heard words of dislike and disdain and threats to
turn me out of the house. If you had it in mind to part Frieda from me
or me from Frieda, it was very cleverly done, but all the same I don’t
think you’ll succeed, and if you do succeed then—forgive me a veiled
threat of my own for once—if you do succeed you will regret it bitterly. As for the room you have given me—by which you can only
mean this repellent hole—it is not at all certain that you’re doing it of
your own free will. I’m more inclined to think that instructions came
from the count’s authorities. I will let them know that I have been
given notice here, and if they ﬁnd me some other lodging I expect
you’ll breathe a deep sigh of relief, but my own will be even deeper.
And now I’m going to see the village mayor about this and various
other matters, so please take care of Frieda, to whom you have done
enough harm with what you describe as your maternal advice.’

Then he turned to the assistants. ‘Come along,’ he said, taking
Klamm’s letter oﬀ the nail and making for the door. The landlady
had been watching him in silence, and only when he had his hand on
the door knob did she say: ‘Mr Land Surveyor, I will give you a piece
of information to take with you, for whatever you may say and whatever insults you may oﬀer me, poor old woman that I am, you are
Frieda’s future husband. It’s only on that account that I tell you how
shockingly ignorant you are of circumstances here, a person’s head
fairly spins just listening to you, comparing what you say and think
with the situation as it really is. Such ignorance can’t be put right all
at once, perhaps not at all, but there can be a good deal of improvement if you will only believe some of what I say, and keep in mind
your ignorance all the time. Then, for instance, you will immediately
do me far more justice and begin to glean some idea of what a shock
it was to me—and the consequences of that shock still aﬀect me—
when I realized that my dear little girl had, so to speak, deserted the
eagle* to ally herself to the slow-worm, but the real situation is far,
far worse, and I keep trying to forget it or I couldn’t speak a calm
word to you. Oh, now you’re angry again. No, don’t go yet, just listen
to my request: wherever you go, always remember that you know less
than anyone here, and mind you proceed carefully. Here, where
Frieda’s presence protects you from harm, you may talk your heart
out; here, if you like, you can tell us what you intend to say to
Klamm. But don’t, I beg you, don’t do it in reality.’
She rose to her feet, swaying slightly in her agitation, went over to
K., and looked imploringly at him. ‘Madam,’ said K., ‘I don’t understand why you demean yourself to beg me for anything with such
small cause. If, as you say, it is impossible for me to speak to Klamm,
then I won’t be able to come near him whether I’m asked to or not.
But if it were to be possible, why shouldn’t I do it, particularly as
then your other fears would become very questionable once your
main objection was seen to be invalid? I am certainly ignorant, but
facts are facts, which is very sad for me but also advantageous, since
an ignorant man will dare to do more, so I will happily go about in
my ignorance with what I am sure are its unfortunate consequences
for a little longer, as long as my strength allows. In essence, however,
those consequences aﬀect only me, and so I really don’t understand
why you should beg me for anything. I am sure you will always care
for Frieda, and if I vanish entirely from Frieda’s view that, as you see

it, can only be a good thing. So what are you afraid of ? I suppose
you don’t—for to the ignorant anything seems possible—’ and
here K. opened the door—‘I suppose you don’t fear for Klamm?’
The landlady watched in silence as he hurried down the stairs, with
the assistants following him.

5
The Village Mayor
To his own surprise, K.’s conversation with the village mayor
went smoothly. He accounted for that by telling himself that, in his
experience so far, oﬃcial dealings with the count’s authorities had
been very simple. One reason was that a deﬁnite decision on his own
aﬀairs had obviously been made once and for all, apparently in his
favour, and another was the admirable consistency of the oﬃces
involved, which you could sense was particularly good in cases where
no such thing appeared to be present. When K. thought about all this
he was not far from considering his situation satisfactory, although
after such cheering moments he always told himself that this was just
where the danger lay. Direct communication with the authorities was
not too diﬃcult, for well-organized as they might be, those authorities had only to defend something remote, in the name of remote and
indeed invisible gentlemen, whereas K. was ﬁghting for something
very close to him, for himself, and doing so, at least at ﬁrst, of his own
free will, for he was the one on the attack. And not only was he ﬁghting
for himself, so too, it seemed, were other powers unknown to him,
although the measures taken by the authorities allowed him to
believe in them. However, the fact that from the ﬁrst the authorities
had met K.’s wishes in minor matters—and so far nothing more had
been involved—meant that they deprived him of the chance of winning small, easy victories and of the satisfaction that went with them
and the well-justiﬁed conﬁdence that he would then derive from
them for embarking on other and larger battles. Instead, the authorities allowed K. to go anywhere he liked, although only inside the
village, thus indulging him but weakening his position, ruling out
any possibility of a struggle, and leaving him living a non-oﬃcial,
unpredictable, troubled, and strange kind of life. If he wasn’t always
on his guard, then, it could be that, despite the amiability of the
authorities, and his own performance of all his extremely light oﬃcial
duties to everyone’s satisfaction, he might, deceived by the favour
apparently shown him, conduct the rest of his life so incautiously
that he failed in this place, and the authorities, still in their gentle and

kindly way, and as if it were against their will but in the name of some
oﬃcial decree unknown to him, would have to get rid of him. And
what actually was the rest of his life here to be? Nowhere before had
K. ever seen oﬃcial duties and life so closely interwoven, so much so
that sometimes it almost seemed as if life and oﬃcial duties had
changed places. What was the meaning, for instance, of the power, so
far only formal, that Klamm had over K.’s services compared with the
power that Klamm really did exert in K.’s bedroom? It just showed
how any carelessness in procedure or easygoing attitude was appropriate only in direct contact with the authorities, while elsewhere
great caution was necessary, and you had to look round on all sides
before taking any step.
At ﬁrst K. found his idea of the authorities here fully conﬁrmed
by the village mayor. A friendly, stout, clean-shaven man, the mayor
was ill with a severe attack of gout, and received K. in bed. ‘Ah, so
this is our land surveyor!’ he said, trying to sit up straight to greet the
visitor, but he couldn’t manage it, and pointing apologetically to his
legs he leaned back on the pillows again. A quiet woman, looking
almost shadowy in the dimly lit room, where the small windows were
also veiled by curtains, brought a chair for K. and placed it by the
bed. ‘Sit down, Mr Land Surveyor, sit down,’ said the mayor, ‘and
tell me what you want.’ K. read Klamm’s letter aloud and made a few
comments on it. Once again, he felt how very easy it was to communicate with the authorities. They would bear absolutely any burden,
you could hand them anything to deal with and remain unaﬀected
and a free agent yourself. As if the mayor felt the same thing in his
own way, he shifted uneasily in his bed. Finally he said: ‘As you’ll
have noticed, Mr Land Surveyor, I knew all about this aﬀair. I haven’t
done anything about it myself, ﬁrst because of my illness, and then
because it took you so long to arrive that I was beginning to think
you’d abandoned the whole business. But now that you have been kind
enough to come and see me yourself, I have to tell you the whole, if
unwelcome, truth. You have been engaged, you say, as a land surveyor, but unfortunately we don’t need a land surveyor. There
wouldn’t be any work for you here at all. The boundary markings of
our little farms are all established, everything has been duly recorded.
Property hardly ever changes hands, and we settle any little arguments about the boundaries ourselves. So why would we need a
land surveyor?’ Without actually having thought about it in advance,

K. felt ﬁrmly convinced that he had expected some such information. For that very reason he was able to say instantly: ‘Well, that
does surprise me a great deal. It throws out all my calculations. I can
only hope there’s some misunderstanding.’ ‘I’m afraid not,’ said the
mayor. ‘It’s exactly as I say.’ ‘But how can that be possible?’ cried K.
‘I didn’t make such an endless journey just to be sent back again
now.’ ‘Oh, that’s another question,’ said the mayor, ‘and it’s not for
me to decide, but I can explain how the misunderstanding may have
come about. In such a large authority as the count’s, it sometimes
happens that one department will arrange this matter, another that,
and neither hears about it from the other. A higher supervisory
department checks everything, and very closely too, but of its nature
such supervision comes too late, and so a little confusion can still
arise. To be sure, that is only in the tiniest of minor details, such as
your own case, and to the best of my knowledge no mistake of the
kind has ever been made in matters of real importance, but the minor
ones often give trouble enough. And as for your case, I will tell
you—I’m not giving any oﬃcial secrets away, I’m not enough of an
oﬃcial for that, I’m a farmer and that’s that—as for your case, I’ll tell
you straight out what happened. Long ago—I’d been village mayor
for only a few months at the time—a decree came from I forget
which department, saying in the categorical terms typical of the gentlemen there that a land surveyor was to be appointed, and the village
was directed to have all the plans and sketches necessary for his work
ready. That decree can’t in fact have had anything to do with you personally, because it was many years ago, and I wouldn’t have remembered it but for being sick just now, with plenty of time to lie in bed
and think about the most ridiculous incidents. Mizzi,’ he added, suddenly interrupting his account to address his wife, who was still
scurrying about the room busy with something, though K. couldn’t
make out just what, ‘please look in the cupboard there and perhaps
you’ll ﬁnd the decree. The fact is,’ he said in an explanatory tone,
turning to K., ‘it dates back to my early days as village mayor, when
I used to keep everything.’ The woman opened the cupboard at once,
while K. and the mayor watched. It was stuﬀed with papers, and
when it was opened two large bundles of ﬁles fell out, tied up as you
might tie up bundles of ﬁrewood. The woman ﬂinched in alarm. ‘Try
lower down, lower down,’ said the mayor, directing operations from
his bed. The woman, gathering up the ﬁles in her arms, obediently

cleared everything out of the cupboard to get to the papers at the
bottom. The room was already half full of papers. ‘Oh, there’s been
a lot of work done,’ said the mayor, nodding, ‘and this is only a small
part of it. I keep the larger part of what I have here in the barn, but
most of it has been lost. How can anyone keep all this together? But
there’s still plenty in the barn. Will you be able to ﬁnd the decree?’
he asked, turning to his wife again. ‘You must look for a ﬁle with the
words Land Surveyor underlined in blue on it.’ ‘It’s too dark in here,’
said his wife. ‘I’ll fetch a candle.’ And she walked over the papers and
out of the room. ‘My wife is a great help to me,’ said the village
mayor, ‘with the burden of all this oﬃcial stuﬀ, which I have to do as
a sideline. I do have another assistant for the written work, that’s the
schoolteacher, but all the same no one can ever get through it, there’s
always a great deal left undone, and it’s in that cupboard.’ He pointed
to another cupboard. ‘And when I’m ill, as I am now, it really gets
the upper hand,’ he said, lying back wearily, but with an expression
of pride on his face. ‘Couldn’t I help your wife to search?’ asked K.,
when the woman had come back with the candle and was kneeling in
front of the cupboard, looking for the decree. Smiling, the mayor
shook his head. ‘As I said just now, I’m keeping no oﬃcial secrets
from you, but I can’t go so far as to let you search the ﬁles yourself.’
All was still in the room now, only the rustle of the papers was to be
heard, and the mayor may even have dropped oﬀ to sleep for a
moment. A soft knock at the door made K. turn. Inevitably, it was his
assistants. But at least they had learned to behave a little better, and
didn’t burst straight into the room but began by whispering through
the door, which stood slightly ajar. ‘It’s too cold for us out there,’
they said. ‘Who’s that?’ asked the mayor, waking with a start. ‘Only
my assistants,’ said K. ‘I don’t know where to leave them to wait for
me; it’s too cold outside, and they’ll be in the way in here.’ ‘They
won’t bother me,’ said the mayor in kindly tones, ‘let them come in.
Anyway, I know them. We’re old acquaintances.’ ‘Well, they bother
me,’ said K. frankly, letting his gaze wander from the assistants to the
mayor and back to the assistants, and ﬁnding it impossible to tell
their three smiles apart. ‘However, since you’re here,’ he suggested
tentatively, ‘you can stay and help the lady look for a ﬁle with the
words Land Surveyor on it underlined in blue.’ The mayor did not
object to that; while K. wasn’t allowed to search the papers the assistants were, and they ﬂung themselves on the ﬁles immediately, but

just churning up the heaps rather than searching properly, and while
one of them was spelling out the words on a piece of paper the other
kept snatching it from his hand. As for the mayor’s wife, she was
kneeling in front of the empty cupboard and no longer seemed to be
searching at all, or at least the candle was a long way away from her.
‘So your assistants bother you, do they?’ said the mayor, with a
satisﬁed smile, as if it was all due to his own arrangements, but no
one was in a position even to suspect as much. ‘But they’re your own
assistants.’ ‘No,’ said K. coolly, ‘they didn’t latch on to me until I got
here.’ ‘Latch on to you?’ said the mayor. ‘I suppose you mean they
were allocated to you.’ ‘Very well, then, they were allocated to me,’
said K., ‘but they might just as well have fallen like snow from the
sky, so little thought went into choosing them.’ ‘Oh, nothing happens here without thought,’ said the mayor, forgetting the pain in his
foot and even sitting up in bed. ‘Nothing?’ said K. ‘What about my
appointment?’ ‘Your appointment will have been carefully considered too,’ said the mayor. ‘But collateral circumstances entered into it
and confused things. I can show you how it all happened from the ﬁles.’
‘I don’t think the ﬁles are going to be found,’ said K. ‘Not found?’
cried the mayor. ‘Mizzi, please search a little faster! For a start, however, I can tell you the story without ﬁles. We replied to the decree
I was talking about by sending our thanks, but pointing out that we
didn’t need a land surveyor. However, that reply doesn’t seem to have
reached the original department, let’s call it A, but by mistake went
to another department, B. So Department A received no answer, but
unfortunately Department B didn’t get our full answer either. Whether
the contents of the ﬁle were left behind here or were lost in transit—
they weren’t lost in the department itself, I can vouch for that—well,
anyway Department B also received the cover of a ﬁle bearing only
the remark that the enclosed ﬁle (which in fact, unfortunately, was not
enclosed) dealt with the appointment of a land surveyor. Department
A, meanwhile, was waiting for our answer; it did have some preliminary notes on the matter, but as often and understandably happens,
and indeed should happen, in view of the meticulous nature of all the
oﬃcial work done, the head of department was relying on us to send
an answer, whereupon he would either appoint the land surveyor or,
if necessary, correspond with us on the subject further. As a result,
he neglected to look at the preliminary notes and let the whole aﬀair
lapse into oblivion. In Department B, however, the cover of the ﬁle

reached an oﬃcial well known for his conscientiousness, Sordini* by
name, an Italian. Even to me, and I’m in the know, it’s hard to understand why a man of his abilities is left languishing in one of the
lowest-ranking positions of all. Well, this Sordini naturally sent us
back the empty cover of the ﬁle, asking for the rest of it. But many
months, if not years, had passed since those ﬁrst documents were
drawn up for Department A, which is understandable, for when, as
generally happens, a ﬁle is sent in the proper way it reaches the right
department within a day at the latest, and is dealt with that same day.
However, if it gets lost—and considering the excellence of the organization it really has to try very hard to get lost or it will never succeed
in doing so—then it can indeed take a very long time. So when we
received Sordini’s note we had only the vaguest memory of the aﬀair;
there were only the two of us doing the work at the time, Mizzi and
me, they hadn’t given me the teacher to assist me yet. We kept copies
only of the most important documents—in short, all we could reply,
very uncertainly, was that we didn’t know anything about any such
appointment, and there was no need for a land surveyor here.
‘However,’ said the mayor, interrupting himself as if, in his eagerness to tell the tale, he had gone too far, or as if it were at least possible
that he had gone too far, ‘I do hope this story isn’t boring you?’
‘Not at all,’ said K. ‘It’s entertaining me.’
‘I’m not telling it to entertain you,’ said the mayor.
‘The only reason why it entertains me,’ said K., ‘is the insight it
gives me into the ridiculous confusion which, in some circumstances,
can determine the course of a man’s life.’
‘You haven’t been given any such insight yet,’ said the mayor
gravely, ‘and I can go on with the story. Naturally a man of Sordini’s
calibre wasn’t going to be satisﬁed with our reply. I admire him, even
though he’s a thorn in my ﬂesh. The fact is, he distrusts everyone,
even when, say, he has come to recognize a person on countless occasions as the most trustworthy man alive—he distrusts him on the
next occasion as if he didn’t know him at all, or more correctly, as if
he knew him to be a rogue. I think that’s quite right, that’s the way
an oﬃcial ought to proceed, but unfortunately I can’t seem to follow
that basic principle. It’s on account of my own nature. You see how
frankly I am telling you, a stranger, all this, I just can’t help it.
Sordini, on the other hand, distrusted our answer at once. And then
a long correspondence ensued. Sordini asked why it had suddenly

occurred to me that no land surveyor ought to be appointed, and
I replied, with the help of Mizzi’s excellent memory, that the ﬁrst
idea had come from the authorities themselves (of course we had
long ago forgotten that it came from a diﬀerent department of the
castle authorities). Sordini then asked why I mentioned the oﬃcial
letter only now, to which I said that it was because I had only just
remembered it. That, said Sordini, was very remarkable. To which
I replied that it wasn’t at all remarkable in an aﬀair that had dragged
on so long. Sordini said no, it was remarkable, because the letter I had
remembered did not exist. Of course it didn’t exist, I said, since the
whole ﬁle had been lost. Here Sordini said that there must, surely,
have been a preliminary note regarding that ﬁrst letter, the one that
didn’t exist. Here I hesitated, for I didn’t like to claim that a mistake
had been made, or say I believed that it had been made, in Sordini’s
department. In your mind, Mr Land Surveyor, perhaps you are
blaming Sordini and thinking that reﬂection on my claim should at
least have caused him to enquire about the case in other departments.
But that wouldn’t have been right; I don’t want any blame imputed
to the man even in your mind. It is a working principle of the authorities that they do not even consider the possibility of mistakes being
made. The excellent organization of the whole thing justiﬁes that
principle, which is necessary if tasks are to be performed with the
utmost celerity. Sordini therefore could not enquire in other departments; moreover, those departments would not have responded to
his enquiries, because they would have noticed at once that they were
being asked to look into the possibility of some mistake.’
‘Mr Mayor, may I interrupt you with a question?’ said K. ‘Didn’t
you mention a supervisory authority checking everything? From
what you say, the organization is of such a kind that one feels quite
ill at the mere idea of these supervisory checks failing.’
‘You are very severe,’ said the mayor, ‘but if you multiplied your
severity a thousand times, it would still be as nothing compared to the
severity of the authorities’ attitude to themselves. Only a complete
stranger would ask your question. Are there supervisory authorities?
There are only supervising authorities. To be sure, they’re not
intended to detect mistakes in the vulgar sense of the word, since
there are no mistakes, and even if there is a mistake, as in your own
case, who’s to say that it’s really a mistake in the long run?’
‘That strikes me as an entirely new idea,’ cried K.

‘It’s a very old one to me,’ said the mayor. ‘I am no less convinced
than you that there has been a mistake, and as a result of his despair
Sordini has fallen very ill, and the ﬁrst supervisory authorities to
check the case, those to which we owe the discovery of the source of
the mistake, also acknowledge its existence. But who can claim that
the second set of supervisory authorities will come to the same conclusion, and then the third set, and so on with all the others?’
‘Maybe,’ said K., ‘but I’d rather not indulge in such reﬂections,
and anyway this is the ﬁrst time I’ve heard of these supervisory
authorities, so of course I can’t understand them yet. Only, I do think
that we have to distinguish between two things here: ﬁrst, what goes
on within the authorities, and what is then oﬃcial or can be taken as
oﬃcial; and second, my own person, outside the orbit of all these
oﬃcial authorities as I am, and threatened by them with such pointless restrictions that I still can’t believe the danger is serious. As for
the ﬁrst point, what you, Mr Mayor, describe with such astonishing
and extraordinary command of the subject is probably true. Only
I wouldn’t mind hearing a word about myself as well.’
‘I’m coming to that,’ said the mayor, ‘but you couldn’t understand
it without a little more preamble. I even mentioned the supervisory
authorities too soon. So I’ll go back to my argument with Sordini. As
I said, my defences gradually came down. But if Sordini can gain even
the slightest advantage over someone else, he has already won the day,
because then his close attention, energy, and presence of mind are all
the greater, and to the man he is attacking he is a fearsome sight,
although a welcome one to that man’s enemies. It’s because I’ve had
this experience in other cases that I can speak of him as I do. By the
way, I’ve never yet managed to set eyes on him myself, he can’t come
down here, he is so overworked. As his oﬃce has been described to
me, all the walls are hidden behind towers of huge bundles of ﬁles
stacked one above another, and these are only the ﬁles on which
Sordini is working at present. Since ﬁles are always being taken out
of the bundles or put back into them, and it’s all done in a great hurry,
the towers are always collapsing, and the sound of them constantly
crashing to the ﬂoor has become typical of Sordini’s oﬃce. Well,
Sordini is a real worker, and he devotes the same attention to both
the smallest cases and the largest.’
‘Mr Mayor,’ said K., ‘you keep calling my case one of the smallest,
yet a great many oﬃcials have put their minds to it, and while it may

have been very small at ﬁrst, the zeal of oﬃcials like Mr Sordini has
made it into a major one. That is unfortunate, and not at all what
I want, since I have no ambition to see towers of ﬁles about me rise
in the air and come crashing down, I just want to work at a little
drawing-board in peace as a humble land surveyor.’
‘No,’ said the mayor, ‘it’s not a major case, you have no grounds for
complaint there. It is one of the smallest of small cases. The status of
the case is not determined by the amount of work done on it, and if
that’s what you think you are still very far from understanding the
authorities. But even if it did depend on the amount of work, your case
would be one of the slightest. There are far more normal cases, I mean
cases where no so-called mistakes creep in, and indeed much more
rewarding work is done on them. Anyway, you know nothing at all
about the real work your case has entailed, and I will now tell you about
it. At ﬁrst Sordini left me right out of it, but then his oﬃcials arrived,
and there were daily hearings of highly regarded members of this
parish at the Castle Inn, all taken down for the records. Most of the
villagers backed me, and only a few expressed distrust, saying that the
question of land surveying concerns a farmer’s interests closely, and
thinking that they detected secret deals of some kind and instances of
injustice. Furthermore, they found a leader, and Sordini was bound to
be convinced, from what they said, that if I had raised the question at
the parish council, not all its members would have been against the
appointment of a land surveyor. So something obvious—I mean the
fact that no land surveyor was needed—was at least questioned. A man
called Brunswick was particularly active here—you probably don’t
know him. He may not be a bad fellow, but he is stupid and has a wild
imagination. He’s the brother-in-law of Lasemann.’
‘Lasemann the master tanner?’ said K., and he described the
bearded man he had seen at Lasemann’s house.
‘Yes, that’s him,’ said the mayor.
‘I know his wife as well,’ said K., trying a shot at random.
‘Quite possibly,’ said the mayor, and fell silent.
‘She’s beautiful,’ said K., ‘but rather pale, and ailing. I suppose
she comes from the castle?’ This was said half as a question.
The mayor looked at the time, poured medicine into a small
spoon, and quickly swallowed it.
‘I suppose all you know of the castle is the oﬃces?’ asked K.
brusquely.

‘Yes,’ agreed the mayor, with an ironic yet grateful smile, ‘and
they’re the most important part of it. As for Brunswick: if we could
keep him out of the parish council we’d nearly all of us be glad, not
least Lasemann. But at that time Brunswick gained some inﬂuence.
He’s not a good speaker, but he shouts, and that’s enough for many
people. That’s how it happened that I was obliged to lay the whole
aﬀair before the parish council, which in fact was Brunswick’s sole
success at ﬁrst, for of course the great majority of the parish council
wouldn’t hear of appointing a land surveyor. That was all years ago
too, but the case has never really been settled all this time, partly
because of the conscientious approach of Sordini, who was trying to
discover the motives of both the majority and the opposition through
the most careful investigation, and partly because of the stupidity and
ambition of Brunswick (who has various personal links with
the authorities), which set his imagination to work thinking up more
and more new ideas. Sordini, however, was not to be deceived by
Brunswick (and how, indeed, could Brunswick deceive Sordini?), but
if he was not to be deceived new enquiries were necessary, and even
before they were dealt with Brunswick had come up with something
fresh. Oh yes, his mind is very quick, it’s all of a piece with his stupidity. And now I come to a particular feature of our oﬃcial mechanism.
When an aﬀair has been under consideration for a very long time, and
even before assessment of it is complete, it can happen that something
occurs to settle it, like a sudden ﬂash of lightning at some unforeseeable
point, and you can’t pinpoint it later. The case is thus brought to an
arbitrary, if usually quite correct, conclusion. It’s as if the oﬃcial
mechanism could no longer stand up to the tension and the years of
attrition caused by the same factor, which in itself may be slight, and
has made the decision of its own accord with no need for the oﬃcials
to take a hand. Of course there has not been any miracle, and certainly
some oﬃcial or other made a note of the matter concluding the case, or
came to an unwritten decision, but at least we here can’t ﬁnd out, even
from the authority, which oﬃcial made the decision in this case and
why. The supervisory authorities will discover that much later, but we
ourselves never do, and by then hardly anyone would be interested.
Well, as I was saying, these decisions are generally excellent, and the
only disruptive aspect of them is that, as it usually turns out, we learn
about them too late, so passionate discussion of an aﬀair that was settled long ago still goes on. I don’t know whether such a decision has

been taken in your case—there is much to suggest that it has and much
to suggest that it hasn’t—but if it had, then a note of your appointment
would have been sent to you, and you would have set out on your long
journey here. Meanwhile a lot of time would have passed, and Sordini
would still have been working himself to exhaustion on the same case,
Brunswick would have been plotting and intriguing, and I’d have been
plagued by the pair of them. I merely suggest this possibility, but I do
know the following for certain: meanwhile a supervisory authority
discovered that many years ago Department A had sent an enquiry to
the parish about a land surveyor, and no answer ever came back. I was
asked about it recently, and then of course the whole matter was
cleared up. Department A was satisﬁed with my answer, to the eﬀect
that no land surveyor was needed, and Sordini was obliged to realize
that he had not been the person competent to deal with this case and,
through no fault of his own, had done a great deal of unnecessary and
nerve-racking work. If new work hadn’t been coming in from all sides,
as usual, and if yours had not, after all, been a very small case—we
might almost say the smallest of the small—then we would probably
all have breathed a sigh of relief, all of us including even Sordini himself, with only Brunswick still feeling ridiculously rancorous. And
now, Mr Land Surveyor, imagine my dismay when, after the happy
conclusion of the whole aﬀair—and a great deal of time has passed
since then too—you suddenly turn up, and it looks as if the whole
thing is going to begin again. I am ﬁrmly determined not to allow this,
so far as in me lies, as I am sure you will understand.’
‘To be sure,’ said K., ‘but I understand even better that I and
perhaps the law too have been shockingly abused. Personally, I will
know how to defend myself.’
‘How are you going to do that?’ asked the mayor.
‘I can’t tell you,’ said K.
‘I don’t wish to impose on you,’ said the mayor, ‘but I suggest
you consider me as—well, I won’t say a friend, since we are total
strangers—but to some extent an associate. I can’t allow you to be
accepted as a land surveyor here, but otherwise you can turn to me
with conﬁdence, although only within the limits of my power, which
is not large.’
‘You keep talking’, said K., ‘about the possibility of my being
accepted as a land surveyor, but I have already been appointed in that
capacity. Here is Klamm’s letter.’

‘Klamm’s letter’, said the mayor, ‘is valuable and deserves respect
for the sake of Klamm’s signature, which does seem to be genuine,
but otherwise—no, I dare not even tell you my opinion. Mizzi!’ he
called, adding: ‘What on earth are you all doing?’
The assistants, who had been out of sight for some time, and
Mizzi had obviously failed to ﬁnd the ﬁle they were looking for, and
had then tried to shut everything up in the cupboard again, but
had failed in that too because of the disorganized and exorbitantly
large number of ﬁles. So the assistants had thought of a plan that
they were now putting into practice. They had laid the cupboard
down on the ﬂoor, stuﬀed all the ﬁles into it, and they and Mizzi sat
on the cupboard doors, thus trying to squeeze them slowly shut.
‘So the ﬁle hasn’t been found,’ said the mayor. ‘Well, that’s a pity,
but you know the story now, so we don’t really need the ﬁle any
more. Anyway it’s sure to be found some time, it’s probably at the
teacher’s place. He has a great many ﬁles there. Now, bring the candle over here, Mizzi, and read this letter with me.’
Mizzi came over, looking even more grey and insigniﬁcant than
before as she sat down on the edge of the bed close to her strong,
vigorous husband, who put his arms around her. Only her little face
showed now in the candlelight, its clear, stern features softened by
the ravages of age. No sooner had she looked at the letter than she
clasped her hands and said: ‘From Klamm.’ Then they read the letter together, whispering to each other from time to time, and ﬁnally,
just as the assistants were cheering because they had ﬁnally managed
to close the cupboard doors, and Mizzi was looking at them in quiet
gratitude, the mayor said:
‘Mizzi thinks just as I do, and now I can venture to speak my
mind. This is not an oﬃcial communication at all, but a private letter.
That’s clear enough even from the salutation, “Dear Sir”. What’s
more, there isn’t a word in it about your being accepted as a land
surveyor, it just deals in general terms with service to the castle, and
even that says nothing binding, only that you have been appointed
“as you know”, that is to say, the burden of proof of the fact that you
have been appointed lies on you. Finally, you are oﬃcially referred
to me, the village mayor, as your immediate superior, who will tell
you everything else, and I’ve done most of that already. This is all as
clear as day to anyone who is accustomed to reading oﬃcial communications, and as a consequence reads unoﬃcial letters even better.

But I’m not surprised that you, a stranger, don’t understand that.
Altogether, the letter means nothing but that Klamm personally
intends to concern himself with you should you be accepted into the
service of the castle.’
‘You interpret the letter so well, Mr Mayor,’ said K., ‘that in the
end there’s nothing left of it but the signature on a blank sheet of
paper. Don’t you think that in doing so you are belittling Klamm’s
name, which you claim to respect?’
‘You misunderstand me,’ said the mayor. ‘I don’t mistake the
meaning of the letter, I don’t belittle it with my interpretation, quite
the contrary. A private letter from Klamm naturally means much
more than an oﬃcial communication. It just doesn’t mean what you
think it means.’
‘Do you know Schwarzer?’ asked K.
‘No,’ said the mayor. ‘Do you, Mizzi? No, she doesn’t either. We
don’t know him.’
‘That’s strange,’ said K. ‘He’s the son of one of the deputy
wardens.’
‘My dear sir,’ said the mayor, ‘how can I be expected to know all
the sons of all the deputy wardens?’
‘Very well,’ said K., ‘then you’ll just have to believe me when I tell
you that he is. I had a diﬀerence of opinion with this man Schwarzer
on the day of my arrival. He then spoke on the telephone to a deputy
warden called Fritz and was told that I had indeed been appointed
land surveyor. How do you explain that, Mr Mayor?’
‘Very easily,’ said the mayor. ‘You have never really been in contact with our authorities. All your contacts are only apparent, but as
a result of your ignorance you think that they are real. And as for the
telephone: look, there’s no telephone here in my house, and I certainly have plenty to do with the authorities. Telephones may come
in useful at inns and so on, rather like a musical box, but that’s all.
Have you ever telephoned anyone here? Well, then perhaps you’ll see
what I mean. The telephone obviously works very well in the castle,
I’ve been told that they are telephoning all the time there, which of
course speeds the work up a great deal. Down here, we hear that
constant telephoning as a rushing, singing sound on the line, and I’m
sure you’ve heard it too. But that rushing, singing sound is the only
real, trustworthy information that the telephone conveys to us down
here, and everything else is just an illusion. There is no telephone

connection to the castle, there’s no switchboard passing on our calls;
if we call someone in the castle from here, the telephones ring in all
the lower departments, or perhaps they would if, as I know for a fact,
the sound was not turned oﬀ on nearly all of them. Now and then a
tired oﬃcial feels the need to amuse himself a little—especially in the
evening or at night—and switches the sound back on, and then we
get an answer, but an answer that is only a joke. It’s very understandable. Who has the right to disturb such important work, always going
full steam ahead, with his own little private worries? I really don’t
understand how even a stranger can believe that if he calls, say,
Sordini, it will really be Sordini who answers him. More likely it will
be some little clerk in quite a diﬀerent department. Although then
again, a wonderful moment might come when you call the little clerk
and Sordini himself answers. In that case, of course, it’s advisable to
hurry away from the telephone before the ﬁrst sound is heard.’
‘Well, that’s not how I saw it,’ said K. ‘I wasn’t to know these details,
but it’s true that I didn’t have much conﬁdence in those telephone
calls. I was always aware that only something experienced or achieved
in the castle itself has any real signiﬁcance.’
‘You’re wrong,’ said the mayor, pouncing on one part of this, ‘of
course these telephone calls have real signiﬁcance, why not? How
could a message passed on from the castle by an oﬃcial be insigniﬁcant? I said so just now, in connection with Klamm’s letter. None of
what it says has any oﬃcial meaning, if you ascribe oﬃcial meaning
to it you are wrong; on the other hand its private signiﬁcance, whether
friendly or hostile, is very great, generally greater than an oﬃcial meaning can ever be.’
‘Very well,’ said K. ‘Assuming it’s all as you say, then I must have
a number of good friends in the castle; in fact look at it properly, and
when that department thought, many years ago, of sending for a land
surveyor it was an act of friendship to me, and act after act of friendship followed, until at last I was enticed here to no good purpose and
then threatened with expulsion.’
‘There’s something in what you say,’ said the mayor. ‘You’re right
to think that communications from the castle mustn’t be taken literally. But caution is necessary in general, not just here, and the more
important the communication concerned, the more necessary it is to
be cautious. I don’t understand what you say about being enticed
here. If you had followed what I was saying better, you would surely

realize that the question of your appointment is far too diﬃcult for
us to be able to answer it in the course of a little conversation.’
‘So the outcome is’, said K., ‘that everything is very confused and
nothing can be solved, and I’m being thrown out.’
‘Who would venture to throw you out, my dear sir?’ said the mayor.
‘The very lack of clarity in the earlier questions assures you of the
most civil treatment, but you appear to be over-sensitive. No one is
keeping you here, but that doesn’t amount to being thrown out.’
‘Oh, Mr Mayor, sir,’ said K., ‘now you’re the one seeing all this
too clearly again. Let me tell you some of the things that keep me
here: the sacriﬁces I made to leave my home; my long and diﬃcult
journey; my well-founded hopes of my appointment here; my complete lack of means; the impossibility of ﬁnding suitable work at home
now; and last but not least my ﬁancée, who comes from this village.’
‘Ah, yes, Frieda!’ said the mayor, not surprised. ‘I know about
that. But Frieda will follow you anywhere. As for the rest of it, certain considerations will be necessary, and I will speak to the castle
about that. Should a decision come, or should it be necessary to
question you again ﬁrst, I’ll send for you. Does that suit you?’
‘No, not at all,’ said K. ‘I don’t want any tokens of favour from the
castle, I want my rights.’
‘Mizzi,’ said the mayor to his wife, who was still sitting close to
him toying dreamily with Klamm’s letter, which she had folded into
a paper boat. In alarm, K. took it from her. ‘Mizzi, my leg is beginning to hurt badly again, we’ll have to change the compress.’
K. rose to his feet. ‘Then I’ll say goodbye,’ he said. ‘Yes, do,’ said
Mizzi, who was already preparing some ointment, ‘there’s a nasty
draught.’ K. turned. The assistants, in their ever-inappropriate
readiness to make themselves useful, had opened both sides of the
double door as soon as they heard K.’s remark. If he was to keep the
penetrating cold out of the sickroom, K. could only bow ﬂeetingly to
the mayor. Then, taking the assistants with him, he went out of the
room and was quick to close the door.

6
Second Conversation with the Landlady
The landlord was waiting outside the inn for him. He would not
have ventured to speak without being asked ﬁrst, so K. asked what
he wanted. ‘Have you found new lodgings?’ asked the landlord, his
eyes bent on the ground. ‘I think you must be asking on behalf of
your wife,’ said K. ‘You seem to be extremely dependent on her.’
‘No,’ said the landlord, ‘I’m not asking on her behalf. But she is very
upset and unhappy about you, she can’t work, she lies in bed sighing
and complaining all the time.’ ‘Shall I go and see her?’ asked K.
‘I wish you would,’ said the landlord. ‘I came to fetch you from the
village mayor’s house, but listening at the door I heard the two of you
in conversation and didn’t like to disturb you. I was worried about
my wife too, so I came straight back, but she wouldn’t let me in to
see her, so all I could do was wait for you.’ ‘Come along then, let’s be
quick about it,’ said K. ‘I’ll soon set her mind at rest.’
‘I only hope so,’ said the landlord.
They went through the well-lit kitchen, where three or four
maids, all keeping some distance from each other, positively froze in
the midst of whatever they were doing at the sight of K. The landlady’s sighs could be heard even here in the kitchen. She was lying in
a little room without any windows, divided from the kitchen by a
thin wooden partition. There was space only for a big double bed and
a wardrobe. The bed was placed so that its occupant could keep an
eye on the entire kitchen and what was going on there. On the other
hand, hardly anything of the little room could be seen from the
kitchen; it was dark inside, and only the red-and-white bedclothes
stood out a little. You couldn’t make out any details until you had
gone in and your eyes became used to the dim light.
‘Here you are at last,’ said the landlady faintly. She lay stretched
full-length on her back, and obviously had some diﬃculty in breathing; she had thrown back the eiderdown. In bed she looked much
younger than when she was fully dressed, but all the same the lacy
nightcap she wore was too small for her, and perched unsteadily on
top of her head, making her worn face look pitiable. ‘How could

I have come?’ asked K. gently. ‘You didn’t send for me.’ ‘You
shouldn’t have kept me waiting so long,’ said the landlady, with the
fretful persistence of an invalid. ‘Well, sit down,’ she said, pointing
to the edge of the bed. ‘And you others go away.’ For not only K.’s
assistants but also the maids had now come in as well. ‘Do you want
me to go too, Gardena?’* asked the landlord, and for the ﬁrst time K.
heard his wife’s name. ‘Of course,’ she said slowly, and as if her
thoughts were elsewhere she added, distractedly: ‘Why should you
of all people stay?’ But when all the others had withdrawn to the
kitchen—and this time even the assistants went at once, though the
fact was that they were chasing one of the maids—Gardena was
obviously paying enough attention to realize that everything said
here could be heard from there, for the little room had no door, so
she ordered everyone to leave the kitchen too. They obeyed at once.
‘Now, Mr Land Surveyor,’ Gardena said, ‘there’s a shawl hanging at
the front of the wardrobe. Please will you give it to me? I want to
cover myself with it, I can’t bear the weight of this eiderdown, I’m
breathing with such diﬃculty.’ And when K. had brought her the
shawl, she said: ‘See this, ﬁne fabric, isn’t it?’ It looked to K. like
perfectly ordinary woollen fabric, and he felt it, simply to please her,
but made no comment. ‘Yes, very ﬁne fabric,’ said Gardena, wrapping it around her. Now she lay there peacefully, and did not seem
to be suﬀering any longer. She even noticed that her hair was untidy
from the way she had been lying on it, and sitting up for a little while
she rearranged it round the nightcap. She had thick hair.
K. was getting impatient, and said: ‘Ma’am, you sent to ask if
I had found other lodgings.’ ‘I sent to ask you that?’ asked the landlady. ‘No, you’re mistaken.’ ‘But your husband has just asked me.’
‘I can believe that,’ said the landlady. ‘I’ve been at daggers drawn
with him. When I didn’t want to have you staying here, he let you
stay; now that I’m happy to have you here he’s driving you away.
He’s always doing that kind of thing.’ ‘Have you changed your mind
about me so much,’ said K., ‘in just a couple of hours?’ ‘I haven’t
changed my mind,’ said the landlady, sounding weaker again. ‘Give
me your hand. There. And now promise to be perfectly frank with
me, and I will be frank with you.’ ‘Good,’ said K. ‘Which of us is
going to begin?’ ‘I will,’ said the landlady. She did not give the
impression that she was ready to oblige K., but just seemed eager to
speak ﬁrst.

She took a photograph out from under her pillow and handed it
to K. ‘Look at that picture,’ she asked earnestly. To get a better
view of it, K. stepped into the kitchen, but even there it wasn’t easy
to make anything out, for the photograph had faded with age, and
was cracked, crumpled, and stained in many places. ‘It’s not in very
good condition,’ said K. ‘I’m afraid not, I’m afraid not,’ said the
landlady. ‘That’s what happens when you carry something on your
person over the years. But if you look at it closely I’m sure you’ll be
able to see everything. I can help you out; just tell me what you see.
I like to hear about that picture. What do you see in it, then?’ ‘A
young man,’ said K. ‘Quite right,’ said the landlady, ‘and what is he
doing?’ ‘I think he’s lying on a plank, stretching and yawning.’ The
landlady laughed. ‘That’s quite wrong,’ she said. ‘But here’s the
plank, and there he is lying on it,’ said K., sticking to his own opinion. ‘Look more closely,’ said the landlady, annoyed. ‘Is he really
lying down?’ ‘Why, no,’ said K. now. ‘He’s not lying down, he is in
the air, and now I see it isn’t a plank, it’s probably a cord, and the
young man is doing the high jump.’ ‘There you are, then,’ said the
landlady, pleased. ‘He’s jumping, yes. That’s how the oﬃcial messengers practise. I knew you’d see what it was. Can you see his face
too?’ ‘Very little of it,’ said K. ‘He’s obviously making a great eﬀort,
his mouth is open, his eyes are narrowed, and his hair is ﬂying in
the air.’ ‘Very good,’ said the landlady approvingly. ‘As you never
saw him in person you can’t make out any more. But he was a handsome lad. I saw him only once, brieﬂy, and I shall never forget him.’
‘Who was he, then?’ asked K. ‘He was the messenger,’ said the landlady, ‘the messenger who was ﬁrst sent by Klamm to summon me to
see him.’
K. wasn’t listening closely; the sound of something tapping on
glass distracted his attention. He soon found out the cause of the
disturbance. The assistants were standing in the yard, shifting from
foot to foot in the snow. They looked pleased to see K. again, cheerfully pointed him out to each other, and kept on tapping at the
kitchen window. At a menacing movement from K. they stopped
that at once, trying to push one another back, but each kept escaping
the other, and soon they were back at the window. K. hurried into
the little room, where the assistants couldn’t see him from outside
and he didn’t have to see them. But that soft and imploring tapping
on the windowpane still followed him.

‘It’s those assistants again,’ he told the landlady by way of apology,
pointing to the yard outside. However, she took no notice of him; she
had taken the picture back, and now she looked at it, smoothed it out,
and pushed it under the pillow again. Her movements were slower
now, but not from weariness, they were slow under the burden of
memory. She had wanted K. to talk to her, and as he did so she had
forgotten about him. She was playing with the fringe of her shawl.
Only after a little while did she look up, pass her hand over her eyes,
and say: ‘This shawl came from Klamm too. And so did this nightcap. The photograph, the shawl, and the nightcap, they’re my three
mementoes of him. I’m not young like Frieda, I don’t aim as high as
she does, nor am I so tender-hearted, she’s very tender-hearted. In
short, I know what’s right and proper, but I have to confess that
without those three things I could probably never have borne it here
for so long, probably not even for a day. These three mementoes may
perhaps appear small things to you, but then, you see, Frieda was
intimate with Klamm for so long, but she has no memento of him at
all. I asked her; she is so impassioned and so insatiable, while I, on
the other hand, who was with Klamm only those three times—he
didn’t send for me any more after that, I don’t know why—I took
those mementoes away with me, guessing how short my time would
be. Well, you have to look after yourself. Klamm never gives anything away of his own accord, but if you see something suitable lying
about there, you can ask for it.’
K. felt uncomfortable listening to these stories, much as they also
aﬀected him. ‘How long ago is all this?’ he asked with a sigh.
‘Over twenty years,’ said the landlady, ‘well over twenty years
ago.’
‘And you’ve been faithful to Klamm so long?’ said K. ‘But ma’am,
do you realize that when you make such confessions you are causing
me severe anxiety when I think of my forthcoming marriage?’
The landlady thought it unseemly for K. to bring up his own
aﬀairs, and cast him an angry sideways glance.
‘Don’t look so cross, ma’am,’ said K. ‘I’m not saying a word
against Klamm, but through the force of circumstance I do have a
certain connection with him; Klamm’s greatest admirer couldn’t
deny that. Well then. As a result of what you say, I can’t help thinking of myself at the mention of Klamm, there’s no altering that.
Moreover, ma’am,’ and here K. took her faltering hand, ‘remember

how badly our last conversation turned out, and recollect that this
time we want to part on good terms.’
‘You are right,’ said the landlady, bowing her head, ‘but spare me.
I am no more sensitive than anyone else, far from it, but we all have
our sensitive spots, and this is mine—my only one.’
‘Unfortunately it is also mine,’ said K. ‘But I will certainly control
myself. However, tell me, ma’am, how am I to bear this terrible
ﬁdelity to Klamm in my own marriage, always supposing that Frieda
is like you in this point?’
‘Terrible ﬁdelity,’ repeated the landlady suddenly. ‘Is it ﬁdelity?
I am faithful to my husband, but Klamm? Klamm once made me his
mistress, can I ever lose that rank? And you ask how you are to bear
it in Frieda? Oh, Mr Land Surveyor, who are you to dare to ask such
a question?’
‘Madam!’ said K. in a tone of warning.
‘I know,’ said the landlady, caving in, ‘but my husband has never
asked me such questions. I don’t know which of us is to be called
more unhappy, I then or Frieda now. Frieda, who wilfully left
Klamm, or I, whom he never summoned again. Perhaps Frieda is the
unhappier one after all, even if she doesn’t yet seem to know the full
extent of it. But my thoughts then dominated my unhappiness more
exclusively, for I kept on asking myself, and at heart I still haven’t
stopped asking: why did it happen? Why did Klamm summon me
three times and not a fourth time, never again a fourth time? What
else could I think about at the time? What else could I speak about to
my husband, whom I married soon after it happened? We had no
time by day, this inn was in a wretched state when we took it over
and had to try to bring it up to scratch, but by night? For years on
end, our conversations at night turned only on Klamm and the reasons
why he changed his mind. And if my husband fell asleep while we
were talking I woke him up, and we went on.’
‘Now, if you will permit me,’ said K., ‘I am going to ask you a very
forthright question.’
The landlady said nothing to that.
‘So I see you will not permit me,’ said K. ‘Very well, that is
enough for me.’
‘Indeed it is,’ said the landlady, ‘that in particular. You take
everything the wrong way, even a silence. You can’t help it. I’ll allow
you to ask.’

‘If I take everything the wrong way,’ said K., ‘perhaps I’m wrong
about my question too, and it isn’t so forthright after all. I just
wanted to know how you came to know your husband, and how this
inn came into your hands.’
The landlady frowned, but said equably enough: ‘It’s a very simple story. My father was the blacksmith here, and Hans, my present
husband, was groom to a gentleman farmer and often visited my
father. That was after my last meeting with Klamm, I was very
unhappy, although I shouldn’t have been, for it was all in order, and
the fact that I wasn’t allowed near Klamm again was Klamm’s own
decision, so that was in order too, only the reasons for it were obscure,
and I might well wonder about those, but I ought not to have been
unhappy. However, I was, and I couldn’t work, but sat in our front
garden all day. Hans saw me there and sometimes sat down with me.
I didn’t tell him my troubles, but he knew what it was all about, and
because he’s a good lad he would sometimes shed tears in sympathy
with me. And when the landlord of that time, whose wife had died,
so that he had to give up the business, besides being an old man
already, well, when he passed our little garden one day he saw the two
of us sitting there, stopped, and without more ado, oﬀered to lease us
the inn. He trusted us, so he didn’t want any money in advance, and
he set the rent very low as well. I didn’t want to be a burden to my
father, I was indiﬀerent to everything else, and so, thinking of the inn
and the new work there that might perhaps help me to forget a little,
I gave Hans my hand in marriage. And that’s my story.’
There was silence for a while, and then K. said: ‘The old landlord
acted generously, if rashly—or did he have special reasons to trust
you both?’
‘Oh, he knew Hans well,’ said the landlady. ‘He was Hans’s uncle.’
‘Then, to be sure,’ said K., ‘Hans’s family must have been greatly
in favour of his marriage to you?’
‘Perhaps,’ said the landlady. ‘I don’t know, I never troubled to
think about it.’
‘But it must have been so,’ said K., ‘if his family was ready to make
such a sacriﬁce and simply hand the inn over to you without security.’
‘He wasn’t being rash, as it turned out later,’ said the landlady.
‘I threw myself into the work, I was strong, I was the blacksmith’s
daughter, I didn’t need a maid or a manservant about the place, I was
everywhere: in the saloon bar, in the kitchen, in the stables, in the yard.

I cooked so well that guests were even enticed away from the Castle
Inn. You haven’t been in the saloon bar at midday, you don’t know
our guests at lunchtime, at that time there were even more of them,
although since then many have stopped coming. As a result we could
not only pay the rent properly, we were able to buy the whole place
after a few years, and we owe almost nothing on it today. To be sure,
another result was that I undermined my health with all this,
I developed a serious heart condition, and now I am an old woman.
You may think that I am much older than Hans, but in reality he is
only two or three years younger than me, and you can be sure he will
never age, for his kind of work—smoking a pipe, listening to the
guests, knocking out his pipe again, sometimes fetching a beer—his
kind of work doesn’t age anyone.’
‘Your achievements are remarkable,’ said K., ‘no doubt about that,
but we were speaking of the time before your marriage, and then it
really would have been amazing for Hans’s family to urge the two of
you to marry, when it meant ﬁnancial sacriﬁce, or at least shouldering such a great risk as handing over the inn trusting only in your
own capacity for work, which they couldn’t have known at the time,
and Hans’s capacity for work, the total absence of which they must
have noticed.’
‘Yes, well,’ said the landlady wearily, ‘I can see what you’re getting
at, and how wide you are of the mark. Klamm had no hand in any of
this. Why would he have thought he should do anything for me, or
more accurately, how could he have thought of doing so anyway? He
knew nothing about me. The fact that he never summoned me again
showed that he had forgotten me. When he doesn’t summon anyone
any more, he forgets her entirely. I didn’t want to say so in front of
Frieda. But it’s not just that he forgets; it’s more than that. For if you
have forgotten someone, you can get to know her again. With Klamm,
however, that’s impossible. When he stops summoning someone he’s
forgotten her entirely, not just in the past, but for the future too,
once and for all. If I go to a great deal of trouble I can think myself
into your mind and your ideas, which make no sense here, however
much to the point they may be wherever it is you come from. Perhaps
your foolish fancies are wild enough to imagine that Klamm gave me
in marriage to a man like Hans so that I would have no trouble in
coming to him again, should he summon me at some time in the
future. Well, folly can go no further. Where is the man who could

keep me from going to Klamm if Klamm were to give me a sign?
Nonsense, utter nonsense, nothing but confusion comes of playing
about with such nonsensical ideas.’
‘No,’ said K., ‘let’s not confuse ourselves. My thoughts had gone
nowhere near as far as you assume, although to tell you the truth they
were on their way there. For the time being, however, I was simply
marvelling that Hans’s family hoped for so much from his marriage
to you, and their hopes were indeed fulﬁlled, although at the cost of
your own heart and your health. The idea of connecting those facts
with Klamm was, indeed, forcing itself upon me, but not—or not
yet—in the crude way in which you presented it, obviously solely for
the purpose of allowing you to snap at me again, which you seem to
enjoy. I wish you joy of that! But I was thinking: ﬁrst, Klamm is
obviously the reason for your marriage. If not for Klamm you
wouldn’t have been unhappy, you wouldn’t have been sitting idle in
the front garden; if not for Klamm Hans wouldn’t have seen you
there, and were it not for your grief Hans, who is shy, would never
have ventured to speak to you. If not for Klamm you and Hans
would never have found yourselves in tears; if not for Klamm Hans’s
kind old uncle the landlord would never have seen you and his
nephew sitting amicably together; if not for Klamm you would not
have been indiﬀerent to life, so you wouldn’t have married Hans.
Well, I would say that Klamm features prominently in all this. But it
goes further. If you hadn’t been trying to forget, you certainly
wouldn’t have worked so hard, with no thought for yourself, and
given the inn such a good reputation. So I detect Klamm again here
too. But quite apart from that, Klamm is the cause of your illness, for
your heart was exhausted with unhappy passion even before your
marriage. There remains only the question of what induced Hans’s
family to favour the marriage so much. You mentioned once that to
have been Klamm’s mistress means a rise in rank for a woman that
she can never lose, so I suppose that may have tempted them. But in
addition, I think, it was the hope that the lucky star which led you to
Klamm—always supposing it was a lucky star, but you say so—was
still yours, that is to say, luck was bound to stay with you, and would
not abandon you as suddenly and abruptly as Klamm did.’
‘Do you mean all that seriously?’ asked the landlady.
‘I do mean it seriously,’ K. was quick to say, ‘only I think that
Hans’s family were neither entirely right nor entirely wrong in their

hopes, and I also think I see the mistake you made. Outwardly it all
seems to have been successful: Hans is well oﬀ, his wife is a ﬁne,
capable woman, he enjoys high regard, no money is owed on the inn.
But it wasn’t really successful: Hans would certainly have been much
happier with a simple girl whose ﬁrst great love he was. If, as you
say reproachfully, he sometimes stands there in the saloon bar looking lost, it may be because he really does feel lost—without being
unhappy about it, to be sure, as far as I know him by now—but it is
equally sure that this handsome, intelligent young man would have
been happier with another wife, by which I mean he would have been
more independent, hard-working, and virile. And you yourself certainly are not happy. As you said, you wouldn’t want to go on living
without those three mementoes, and you have a weak heart as well.
So were Hans’s family wrong in their hopes? No, I don’t think so.
The blessing of that lucky star was yours, but they didn’t know how
to make the most of it.’
‘What did they fail to do, then?’ asked the landlady. She was now
lying full-length on her back, looking up at the ceiling.
‘They didn’t ask Klamm,’ said K.
‘Ah, so we’re back with your own aﬀairs,’ said the landlady.
‘Or yours,’ said K. ‘Our aﬀairs run parallel.’
‘What do you want of Klamm, then?’ asked the landlady. She
had now shaken up the pillows so that she could lean back on them
sitting upright, and was looking K. full in the face. ‘I have told you
frankly about my case, from which you might have learnt something.
Now, tell me equally frankly what you want to ask Klamm. It was
only with diﬃculty that I persuaded Frieda to go up to your room
and stay there. I was afraid you wouldn’t speak frankly enough in
front of her.’
‘I have nothing to hide,’ said K. ‘But ﬁrst let me point something
out to you. Klamm forgets at once, you said. First, that seems to me
most unlikely, and second, it can’t be proved and is obviously nothing but a legend invented by the girlish minds of those who have
been in favour with Klamm. I am surprised that you believe such a
downright invention.’
‘It isn’t a legend,’ said the landlady. ‘It derives from general experience.’
‘But it can also be countered by a new experience,’ said K.
‘There’s a diﬀerence between your case and Frieda’s. Klamm didn’t

stop summoning Frieda; one might say, he did summon her but she
didn’t comply. It’s even possible that he is still waiting for her.’
The landlady fell silent and merely let her eyes wander over K.,
observing him. Then she said: ‘I will listen calmly to everything you
have to say. I would rather you spoke openly than think you were
sparing me. I have only one request. Do not mention Klamm’s name.
Call him “he”, or something else, but don’t call him by his name.’
‘I’m happy to oblige you,’ said K., ‘but it’s diﬃcult to say just what
I want of him. First I want to see him at close quarters, then I want
to hear his voice, and then I want to know from the man himself how
he feels about our marriage. Anything else I may ask him depends on
the course of the conversation. There could be a good many subjects
for discussion, but what matters most to me is to see him face to face.
I have never yet spoken directly to any of the real oﬃcials here. It
seems harder to achieve that than I expected. But now it’s my duty
to speak to him as a private person, and as I see it that’s much more
easily done; I can speak to him as an oﬃcial only in his oﬃce, which
may be inaccessible, in the castle or—and I’m not sure about that—
at the Castle Inn, but I can speak to him as a private person anywhere, indoors or in the street, wherever I happen to meet him. If
I then ﬁnd I have the oﬃcial facing me instead, I’m happy with that,
but it is not my prime aim.’
‘Very well,’ said the landlady, pressing her face down into the
pillows as if venturing to make an indecent remark, ‘if I can get your
request for a conversation with Klamm passed on through my connections, then promise me to do nothing on your own account* until
the answer comes down from the castle.’
‘Much as I’d like to do as you ask or humour your whim,’ said K.,
‘I can’t promise that. This is urgent, particularly after the unfortunate outcome of my conversation with the village mayor.’
‘We can dismiss that objection,’ said the landlady. ‘The mayor is a
man of no importance at all. Didn’t you notice? He wouldn’t keep his
job for a day if it weren’t for his wife. She’s in charge of everything.’
‘Mizzi?’ asked K. The landlady nodded. ‘She was there, yes,’ K.
said.
‘Did she give an opinion on anything?’ asked the landlady.
‘No,’ said K. ‘And I didn’t get any impression that she could.’
‘Ah, well,’ said the landlady, ‘you have the wrong idea of everything here. At least, whatever the mayor has decided about you is of

no signiﬁcance. I’ll have a word with his wife some time. And if I also
promise you that Klamm’s answer will come in a week at the latest,
you have no reason not to do as I say.’
‘None of this is the deciding factor,’ said K. ‘I’ve made my decision, and I would try to act by it even if a negative answer came. But
if that’s what I mean to do all along, I can’t request an interview ﬁrst.
What might still be a daring but honestly meant venture without
such a request would be downright insubordination after an answer
rejecting it. Surely that would be much worse.’
‘Worse?’ said the landlady. ‘It’s insubordination in any case. And
now do as you like. Hand me my dress.’
Taking no more notice of K., she put on her dress and hurried into
the kitchen. A commotion in the saloon had been audible for some
time. Someone had knocked on the hatch in the partition. The assistants had pushed it open and called in that they were hungry. Then
other faces had appeared there. You could even hear several voices
singing in harmony.
It was true that K.’s conversation with the landlady had considerably delayed the cooking of the midday meal, which was not ready
yet, but the customers were assembled, although no one had dared to
break the landlady’s ban on entering the kitchen. However, now that
the watchers at the hatch were calling for the landlady to hurry up,
the maids came running into the kitchen, and when K. entered the
saloon bar the remarkably large company, over twenty people, both
men and women, dressed in provincial but not rustic fashion, left the
window where they had been assembled and streamed towards the
small tables to make sure of their places. A married couple and several children were already sitting at one little table in a corner: the
husband, a friendly, blue-eyed gentleman with ruﬄed grey hair and
a beard, was standing up and bending over towards the children,
beating time with a knife to their song, which he kept trying to
quieten down. Perhaps he hoped that singing would make them
forget they were hungry. The landlady apologized to the company in
a few words, perfunctorily spoken, and no one reproached her. She
looked round for the landlord, but in view of the awkwardness of the
situation he had probably made his escape long ago. Then she went
slowly into the kitchen, without another glance at K., who hurried
up to his room and Frieda.

7
The Teacher
K. found the teacher up there. It was good to see that the room
could hardly be recognized, Frieda had been so busy. It had been
well aired, the stove heated with plenty of fuel, the ﬂoor washed, the
bed made, while the maids’ things, mostly nasty and tawdry, had
gone, and so ﬁnally had their pictures. The table, where the encrusted
dirt on top of it had previously positively stared you in the face wherever you turned, was now covered with a white crochet-work tablecloth. It was possible to receive guests here now, and the fact that
K.’s small stock of underwear, which Frieda had obviously washed
earlier, was hanging near the stove to dry was not obtrusive. The
schoolteacher and Frieda were sitting at the table and rose to their
feet when K. came in. Frieda greeted K. with a kiss, the teacher
bowed slightly. K., distracted and still agitated after his conversation
with the landlady, began to apologize for not having visited the
teacher yet, sounding as if he assumed that the teacher, impatient
over his failure to turn up, had now himself come to visit him.
However, in his measured way the teacher seemed to recollect only
after a while that he and K. had made an appointment to meet at
some time. ‘So, Mr Land Surveyor,’ he said slowly, ‘you’re the
stranger I spoke to a few days ago outside the church.’ ‘Yes,’ replied
K. brieﬂy; here in his own room he didn’t have to put up with what
he had tolerated there when he was feeling so desolate. He turned to
Frieda and told her that he had to pay an important call at once, one
for which he must be as well dressed as possible. Without asking K.
any further questions Frieda immediately called the assistants, who
were busy investigating the new tablecloth, and told them to take
K.’s clothes, and the boots he began to pull oﬀ at once, down to
the yard and clean them carefully. She herself took a shirt oﬀ the
washing-line and went down to the kitchen to iron it.
Now K. was alone with the teacher, who was still sitting at the
table in silence, and he made him wait a little longer as he took oﬀ the
shirt he was wearing and began washing at the basin. Only now, with
his back to the teacher, did he wonder why the man had come.

‘I have come on behalf of the village mayor with a message,’ said the
teacher. K. was ready to listen to what the mayor wanted, but as it
was diﬃcult to make himself heard through the sound of splashing
water, the teacher had to come closer and lean against the wall beside
K., who excused himself for washing and for his state of agitation by
the urgency of the call he intended to pay. The teacher ignored this,
and remarked: ‘You were uncivil to the village mayor, that meritorious, experienced, and highly esteemed old man.’ ‘I didn’t know I
had been uncivil,’ said K., drying himself. ‘But it’s true that I had
something other than elegant manners to think about, something of
importance to my very existence, which is threatened by a disgraceful oﬃcial organization the details of which I need not describe to
you, since you yourself work actively for the authorities. Has the village mayor complained of me?’ ‘In what quarter would he have
complained?’ said the teacher. ‘Even if he knew where to turn, would
he ever complain? I have simply drawn up, at his dictation, a small
memorandum about your conversation, from which I learned quite
enough about the mayor’s kindness and the way you answered him
back.’ As K. was looking for his comb, which Frieda must have
tidied away somewhere, he said: ‘What? A memorandum? Drawn up
after the event, and in my absence, by someone who wasn’t present
during the conversation? Not bad, I must say. And why a memorandum? Was it something oﬃcial?’ ‘No,’ said the teacher, ‘semi-oﬃcial,
and the memorandum itself is only semi-oﬃcial. It was written down
solely because we must observe strict protocol in everything. At least
it’s down on paper now, and it does you no credit.’ K., who had
ﬁnally found the comb, which had slipped into the bed, said more
calmly: ‘Well, so it’s down on paper. Did you come just to tell me
that?’ ‘No,’ said the teacher, ‘but I am not an automaton, and must
tell you my opinion. The message I bring, on the other hand, is further
proof of the mayor’s kindness, which I’d like to point out is beyond
my own comprehension, and only under the pressure of my position
and out of respect for the mayor do I deliver it.’ K., now washed and
with his hair combed, sat at the table waiting for the shirt and his
other clothes; he was not even curious about what the teacher was
telling him, and he was also inﬂuenced by the landlady’s low opinion
of the mayor. ‘I suppose it’s after midday?’ he said, thinking of the
long way he had to go, and then, catching himself up, added: ‘But
you wanted to tell me something about the mayor.’ ‘Very well,’ said

the teacher, shrugging his shoulders as if disclaiming any responsibility of his own. ‘The village mayor fears that, if the decision on
your aﬀairs is too long in coming, you may do something thoughtless
of your own accord. For my part, I don’t know why he fears that; my
own view is that you might as well do what you like. We are not your
guardian angels, we’re not obliged to chase after you wherever you
go. Well then. The village mayor does not share my opinion. To be
sure, he cannot hasten the decision itself, that’s a matter for the
count’s authorities. But he is ready to make a provisional and truly
generous decision within his own competence, and now it remains
only for you to accept it: he oﬀers you the temporary post of school
janitor.’ At ﬁrst K. hardly noticed exactly what he was being oﬀered,
but the mere fact that there was an oﬀer of any kind seemed to him
not insigniﬁcant. It indicated that in the mayor’s view he was in a
position to do things in his own defence which justiﬁed the parish
council in going to some trouble to protect itself. And how seriously
everyone took all this! The teacher, who had been waiting here for
some time after writing out the memorandum, must have been positively driven to come here by the mayor.
When the teacher saw that he had made K. thoughtful after all, he
went on: ‘I put forward my own objections. I pointed out that so far
no school janitor had been necessary, the sexton’s wife tidies up from
time to time, supervised by my assistant teacher Miss Gisa, and I have
quite enough trouble with the children, I really don’t want a janitor
giving me more. But the mayor said that in fact it was very dirty in
the school. I replied, truthfully, that it wasn’t so very bad. And, I
added, will it be any better if we take this man on as janitor? Certainly
not. Apart from the fact that he knows nothing about such work, the
schoolhouse has only two large classrooms, and no extra rooms, so
the school janitor and his family would have to live in one of the
classrooms, sleep in it, perhaps even cook in it, which would hardly
leave the place any cleaner. But the mayor pointed out that this position was a haven for you in your time of need, and so you would do
your utmost to ﬁll it well, and in addition, said the mayor, we would
also be obtaining your wife and your assistants to work for us, so that
it would be possible to keep not only the school itself but the school
garden in perfect order. I was easily able to disprove all this. At last
there was no more the mayor could plead in your favour, so he
laughed and just said well, after all you are a land surveyor, so you’d

be able to tend the beds in the school garden particularly well. No
one can take exception to a joke, and so I came to see you with this
oﬀer.’ ‘You have gone to unnecessary trouble, sir,’ said K. ‘I have no
intention of accepting the position.’ ‘Excellent,’ said the teacher,
‘excellent. You decline it out of hand.’ And he took his hat, bowed,
and left.
In a moment Frieda came up, looking anxious; she brought back
the shirt un-ironed, and wouldn’t answer any questions. To divert
her mind, K. told her about the teacher and his oﬀer, but she was
hardly listening. She threw the shirt down on the bed and hurried
away again. Soon she came back, but with the teacher, who looked
morose and gave not a word of greeting. Frieda begged him for a little
patience—obviously she had done so already on the way here—and
then took K. through a side door which he had not previously noticed
into the attic next to his room, where she ﬁnally, out of breath and in
great agitation, told him what had happened. The landlady, angry
that she had lowered herself to make certain confessions to K., and
what was even worse had condescended, yielding as her nature was,
to promote the idea of a conversation between Klamm and K., and
now, having achieved nothing but, as she said, a cold and moreover
insincere rejection, was determined not to have K. in the house any
longer. If he had connections with the castle, she said, he had better
make use of them very quickly, because he must leave the inn today,
this very hour, and she would not take him back except by direct order
of the authorities and under coercion; but she hoped it wouldn’t
come to that, for she too had connections with the castle and would
make use of them. Furthermore, he was in the house now as a result
of the landlord’s negligence, and was not in any other distress at all,
for this very morning he had boasted of having a bed for the night
available to him elsewhere. Frieda was of course to stay here; if
Frieda were to move out with K. she, the landlady, would be very
unhappy, in fact she had collapsed beside the stove in the kitchen
shedding tears at the mere thought of it, that poor woman with her
heart trouble, but what else could she do, said Frieda, now that, as
the landlady saw it anyway, the honour of Klamm’s memory and his
mementoes was at stake. That was the landlady’s attitude. Frieda
would indeed follow him, K., wherever he went, she said, through
snow and ice, of course there was no question of that, but they were
both in a terrible situation. So she had been very happy to hear about

the mayor’s oﬀer, and even if it wasn’t a suitable post for K., after all
it was only temporary, as had been expressly pointed out. They would
gain time and would easily ﬁnd other possibilities, even if the ﬁnal
decision were not to turn out well. ‘If need be,’ cried Frieda ﬁnally,
clinging round K.’s neck, ‘we can go away; what is there to keep us
here in the village? But just for the moment, my dear, let’s accept the
oﬀer, shall we? I have brought the teacher back, you just have to tell
him, “I accept,” no more, and we’ll move to the school.’
‘This is a poor state of things,’ said K., but without meaning it
entirely seriously, for he didn’t much mind where he stayed, and
here in the attic, which had no walls and windows on two sides, while
a cold draught blew keenly through it, he was freezing in his underwear. ‘You’ve made the room so nice, and now we have to move out.
I’d be very, very unwilling to accept the position; it’s embarrassing
to be instantly humiliated in front of this petty little teacher, and now
he is to be my superior. If we could only stay here a little longer,
perhaps my situation may change this very afternoon. If at least you
were to stay, we could wait and put the teacher oﬀ. I can always ﬁnd
a place to spend the night, in the bar if needs must —’ But here
Frieda put her hand over his mouth. ‘Not that,’ she said anxiously,
‘please don’t say that again. However, I’ll do as you say in everything
else. If you want me to stay here on my own then I will, sad as it
would be for me. If you like we’ll reject the oﬀer, although I do think
it would be the wrong thing to do. Because listen, if you ﬁnd anything else, even this afternoon, well, naturally we’ll give up the place
at the school at once then, no one will try to stop us. And as for your
humiliation in front of the teacher, trust me to make sure it’s no such
thing. I’ll speak to him myself, you will just have to stand there in
silence, and it will be the same later. You’ll never have to speak to
him yourself if you don’t want to. I and I alone will probably be his
servant, and not even that, for I know his weaknesses. So all is not
lost if we accept the post, but a great deal is lost if we refuse it. Above
all, if you don’t hear anything from the castle today, you are really
unlikely to ﬁnd a bed for the night anywhere in the village of which
I myself, as your future wife, would not be ashamed. And if you
don’t get a bed for the night, are you going to expect me to sleep here
in this warm room, while I know that you are wandering outside in
the dark and the cold?’ K., who all this time had been standing with
his arms folded, slapping his back with his hands to warm himself

up a bit, said: ‘Then I see there’s nothing for it but to accept. Come
along!’
Back in the room he went straight to the stove, ignoring the teacher,
who was sitting at the table, took out his watch, and said: ‘It’s getting
late.’ ‘But now we are agreed, sir,’ said Frieda. ‘We’ll take the post.’
‘Very well,’ said the teacher, ‘but the post is oﬀered to the land surveyor here. He must speak for himself.’ Frieda came to K.’s aid.
‘Really,’ she said, ‘he does accept the post, don’t you, K.?’ So K. was
able to limit his declaration to a simple: ‘Yes,’ not even directed at
the teacher but at Frieda. ‘Then’, said the teacher, ‘all that remains
is for me to tell you what your duties will be, so that we’re agreed on
that once and for all. You, Mr Land Surveyor, are to clean and heat
both classrooms every day, do small repairs about the place, clear the
path through the garden of snow, run errands for me and my assistant teacher, and do all the gardening in the warmer seasons of the
year. In return you have the right to live in one of the classrooms,
whichever you choose, but if the children are not being taught in
both rooms at the same time, and you happen to be in the room
where they are being taught, you must of course move into the other
room. You may not cook in the school building, but you and your
household will be given board here at the inn at the expense of the
parish. I mention only in passing, for as an educated man you will
know such things for yourself, that you must strictly uphold the
dignity of the school, and in particular the children must never, for
instance, have to witness any unpleasant scenes in your domestic life
during lessons. In that respect, let me just mention that we must
insist on your putting your relationship with Miss Frieda on a legal
footing as soon as possible.’ All this seemed to K. unimportant, as if
it did not concern him, or at least did not bind him in any way, but
the teacher’s arrogant manner annoyed him, and he said casually:
‘Well, I suppose these are the usual obligations.’ To cover up a little
for this remark, Frieda asked about the salary. ‘Whether or not any
salary is paid,’ said the teacher, ‘will be considered only after a month’s
service on probation.’ ‘But that’s going to be diﬃcult for us,’ said
Frieda. ‘We’re to get married almost penniless and set up household
on nothing. Sir, couldn’t we lodge a petition with the parish asking
for a small salary at once? Would you advise that?’ ‘No,’ said the
teacher, still speaking to K. ‘Such a petition would be answered as you
wish only if I were to recommend it, and I wouldn’t. I have oﬀered

the post only as a favour to you, and favours mustn’t go too far if a
man’s to maintain his awareness of his public responsibility.’ Here
K. did intervene, almost against his will. ‘As for favours, sir,’ he said,
‘I think you are wrong. Perhaps I’m the one doing you the favour.’
‘Oh no,’ said the teacher, smiling, for now he had forced K. to speak
directly to him after all, ‘I have precise instructions on that point. We
need a school janitor about as much as we need a land surveyor.
Janitor or land surveyor, you’re a millstone around our necks. I shall
have to think hard to ﬁnd a way of justifying the expense to the parish council; it would be best, and more in line with the facts, just to
put the demand on the table and not try justifying it at all.’ ‘That’s
exactly what I mean,’ said K. ‘You have to take me on against your
will, and although you have many reservations about it you have to
accept me. But if someone is forced to accept another person, and
that other person allows himself to be accepted, he is the one doing
the favour.’ ‘Strange,’ said the teacher. ‘What, I ask, could force us
to take you? Why, only the village mayor’s good, over-generous heart.
I see very well, Mr Land Surveyor, that you’ll have to abandon many
of your fanciful notions before you are any use as a school janitor.
Naturally such remarks as that won’t make anyone feel inclined to
pay you a salary. I am afraid I must also remark that your conduct
will give me a great deal of trouble; all this time you are trying to
negotiate with me, as I can’t help seeing, and I can hardly credit it,
in your shirt and underpants.’ ‘So I am,’ said K., laughing and clapping his hands. ‘What’s become of those dreadful assistants of mine?’
Frieda hurried to the door. The teacher, realizing that K. was not
going to respond to him any more, asked Frieda when they would be
moving into the school. ‘Today,’ said Frieda. ‘Then I’ll come to
check on you ﬁrst thing tomorrow,’ said the teacher, raising a hand
in farewell. He was about to go through the door, which Frieda had
opened for him, but collided with the maids coming back with their
things to settle into the room again. He had to slip past them, for they
made way for nobody. Frieda followed him. ‘You’re in a hurry,’ said
K. to the maids, very pleased with them this time. ‘We’re still here,
and you have to move in at once?’ They did not reply, but merely
ﬁddled awkwardly with their bundles, from which K. saw the familiar grubby rags hanging out. ‘I don’t think you can ever have washed
your things,’ said K., not angrily but with a certain liking for them.
They noticed it, opened their unyielding mouths at the same time to

display ﬁne, strong teeth, like the teeth of animals, and laughed without a sound. ‘Come along then,’ said K. ‘Settle in; it’s your room,
after all.’ But when they still hesitated—perhaps their room struck
them as changed too much—K. took one of them by the arm to lead
her further in. However, he let her go again at once, for the glance
that, after coming to a brief mutual understanding, they both bent on
K. was so surprised. ‘Well, you’ve stared at me long enough,’ said
K., fending oﬀ a certain uncomfortable feeling. He took his shoes
and boots, which Frieda, followed timidly by the assistants, had just
brought, and dressed. It was still a mystery to him how Frieda could
be so patient with the assistants. They had been supposed to be
cleaning his clothes down in the yard, but after a long search she had
found them sitting happily downstairs at their midday meal, the
clothes bundled together on their laps. She had had to clean them all
herself, and yet, although she was used to giving orders to menials,
she did not scold them, but told him, and in their presence too, of
their shocking negligence as if it were a little joke, and even tapped
one of them lightly, almost ﬂatteringly, on the cheek. K. would reprove
her for that in the near future, he thought, but now it was high time
to leave. ‘The assistants can stay here and help you with moving our
things,’ said K. to Frieda. But they were not happy with that; cheerful and well fed as they were, they liked the idea of a little exercise.
Only when Frieda said: ‘That’s right, you stay here,’ did they agree.
‘Do you know where I’m going now?’ asked K. ‘Yes,’ said Frieda.
‘And you’re not trying to stop me any more?’ asked K. ‘You’ll ﬁnd
so many obstacles in your way,’ said she, ‘what would anything I say
mean?’ She kissed K. goodbye, gave him a package of bread and
sausage that she had brought up for him, since he had had no lunch,
reminded him that he was to go to the school later and not come back
here, and with her hand on his shoulder went down to the front door
with him.

8
Waiting for Klamm
At ﬁrst K. was glad to have escaped the warm room, crowded as it
was with the maids and the assistants. It was freezing a little outside,
the snow was ﬁrmer and walking easier. However, it was beginning
to grow dark, so he quickened his pace.
The castle, its outline already beginning to blur, lay as still as
always. K. had never seen the slightest sign of life there. Perhaps it
wasn’t possible to make anything out from this distance, yet his eyes
kept trying and wouldn’t accept that it could lie so still. When K.
looked at the castle he sometimes thought he saw someone sitting
quietly there, looking into space, not lost in thought and thus cut
oﬀ from everything else, but free and at ease, as if he were alone
and no one was observing him. He must notice that he himself was
under observation, but that didn’t disturb him in the slightest, and
indeed—it was hard to tell whether this was cause or eﬀect—the
observer’s eyes could ﬁnd nothing to fasten on, and slipped away
from the ﬁgure. This impression was reinforced today by the early
coming of darkness. The longer he looked, the less he could make
out, and the further everything receded into the twilight.
Just as K. reached the Castle Inn, which still had no lights on, a
window on the ﬁrst ﬂoor opened, a stout, clean-shaven young gentleman in a fur coat leaned out and stayed where he was at the window,
appearing not to respond to K., who hailed him, with even the slightest nod of his head. K. met no one in either the entrance hall or the
bar, where the smell of stale beer was even stronger than before. That
sort of thing didn’t happen at the Bridge Inn. K. immediately went
to the door through which he had seen Klamm last time he was here
and carefully pressed the handle down, but the door was locked.
Then he tried feeling about for the peephole, but presumably the
catch over it was so well ﬁtted that he couldn’t ﬁnd it by touch, and
so he struck a match. Then he was alarmed by a cry. A young girl was
sitting huddled by the stove in the corner between the door and the
sideboard, staring at him as the match ﬂared up and struggling to
open her drowsy eyes properly. This was obviously Frieda’s successor.

She soon pulled herself together and turned on the electric light, the
expression on her face still unfriendly, but then she recognized K.
‘Ah, it’s you, Mr Land Surveyor,’ she said with a smile, and oﬀered
him her hand, introducing herself: ‘My name is Pepi.’* She was
small, red-cheeked, and healthy in appearance, her profuse sandy
hair was plaited into a big braid, and curls had escaped it to surround
her face. She wore a dress that didn’t suit her at all, made of some
shiny grey fabric, falling straight but drawn together at the hem with
childish clumsiness by a silk ribbon tied in a bow, which kept her
from moving freely. She asked how Frieda was, and whether she
wasn’t going to come back here soon. There was almost a touch of
malice in her question. ‘I was sent for in a hurry as soon as Frieda
had left,’ she added, ‘because they can’t have just any girl working
here. I’ve been a chambermaid until now, and I can’t say I’ve done
well out of my change of job. There’s a lot of work here in the evenings and at night, which is very tiring, I’ll hardly be able to stand it,
and I don’t wonder that Frieda gave it up.’ ‘Frieda was very well
satisﬁed with the job here,’ said K., to make Pepi aware of the diﬀerence between her and Frieda, which she seemed to ignore. ‘Don’t
you believe her,’ said Pepi. ‘Frieda can control herself better than
most people. What she doesn’t want to admit she won’t admit, so
that you don’t even notice she has something to admit. I’ve been
working here with her for several years, we always shared a bed, but
I can’t say I was close friends with her, and I’m sure she doesn’t give
me a thought any more. Her one woman friend, maybe, is the old
landlady of the Bridge Inn, which is typical of her.’ ‘Frieda is my
ﬁancée,’ said K., looking for the peephole in the door as he spoke.
‘I know,’ said Pepi, ‘that’s why I’m telling you. If she wasn’t your
ﬁancée, then it wouldn’t be of any importance to you.’ ‘I understand,’ said K. ‘You mean I can be proud of having won myself such
a reserved girl.’ ‘Yes,’ she said, and laughed, sounding pleased, as if
she had induced K. to come to some secret understanding with her
about Frieda.
But it wasn’t really anything she said that occupied K.’s mind and
distracted him a little from what he was looking for; it was her
appearance and her presence here. To be sure, she was much younger
than Frieda, almost a child still, and her clothes were ridiculous;
she had obviously dressed in line with her own ideas of a barmaid’s
importance. And in her way she was right, since the position, for

which she wasn’t yet in the least suited, had presumably come to her
unexpectedly, undeserved, and only on a trial basis. Even the little
leather bag that Frieda always used to carry at her belt had not been
entrusted to her. As for her alleged dissatisfaction with the job, she
was simply showing oﬀ. Yet in spite of her childlike foolishness,
she too probably had connections with the castle. If she wasn’t lying,
she had been a chambermaid, she slept away the days here without
knowing the value of what she had, and if he embraced her small,
plump, rather round-shouldered body he couldn’t deprive her of
that, but proximity to it might encourage him for the diﬃcult task
ahead. Then perhaps she was not so very diﬀerent from Frieda after
all? Oh yes, she was. He had only to think of Frieda’s glance to be
sure of that. No, K. would never have touched Pepi. Yet he had to
cover his eyes for a while, he was looking at her so avidly.
‘We don’t need the light on,’ said Pepi, turning it oﬀ again. ‘I only
turned it on because you gave me such a fright. What do you want
here, anyway? Has Frieda left something behind?’ ‘Yes,’ said K.,
pointing to the door. ‘Here, in the next room, a tablecloth, a white
crochet-work cloth.’ ‘Oh yes, that’s right, her tablecloth,’ said Pepi.
‘I remember, a ﬁne piece of work, I helped her with it, but it’s not in
that room.’ ‘Frieda thinks it is. Who’s staying in there?’ asked K. ‘No
one,’ said Pepi, ‘it’s the gentlemen’s dining-room, it’s where they eat
and drink, or rather it’s meant for that, but most of the gentlemen
stay up in their own rooms.’ ‘If I could be sure’, said K., ‘that there
was no one in the room next door just now, I’d really like to go in and
look for that tablecloth. But I can’t be sure, can I? Klamm for one
often sits in that room.’ ‘Klamm certainly isn’t there now,’ said Pepi.
‘He’s just going out. The sleigh is waiting for him in the yard.’
K. left the bar immediately, without a word of explanation, and in
the entrance hall turned not to the way out but to the interior of the
house. A few more steps brought him to the yard. How quiet and
beautiful it was here! The yard was rectangular, enclosed on three
sides by the inn building and on the other side, where the road
lay—a side-street that K. didn’t know—by a high white wall. A
large, heavy gate in the wall now stood open. Seen from here, the inn
looked higher on the side facing the yard than in front, or at least the
ﬁrst ﬂoor was greatly extended and seemed larger, for it had a
wooden gallery running around it, closed except for a small gap at
eye level. Diagonally opposite K., in the central part of the building

but at the corner where the side wing adjoined it, there was an open
way into the house without any door. In front of it stood a dark,
closed sleigh with two horses harnessed to it. There was no one in
sight but the driver, whose presence at this distance and in the dark
K. guessed at rather than actually seeing him.
Hands in his pockets, looking cautiously around him, and keeping
close to the wall, K. skirted two sides of the yard until he had reached
the sleigh. The driver, one of those rustics who had been in the bar
the other day, was sitting there wrapped in furs and had watched him
approaching without interest, much as your eyes might idly follow a
cat prowling along. When K. had reached him and said good evening,
and even the horses became a little uneasy at the sight of a man
emerging from the darkness, he still showed no interest at all. K.
welcomed that. Leaning against the wall, he unpacked his sandwich,
thought gratefully of Frieda who had provided for him so well, and
as he did so peered inside the house. A staircase turning at right
angles led up, and a low-ceilinged but apparently long passage
crossed it at the bottom of the stairs. Everything was clean, whitewashed, neatly delineated.
The wait was longer than K. had expected. He had ﬁnished his
sandwich long ago, the cold was biting, the twilight had become full
darkness, and still there was no sign of Klamm. ‘Could be a long time
yet,’ said a hoarse voice suddenly, so close to K. that he jumped. It
was the driver, stretching and yawning loudly as if he had just woken
up. ‘What could be a long time yet?’ asked K., not displeased by the
interruption, for the continuing silence and suspense had become
oppressive. ‘Could be a long time before you leave,’ said the driver.
K. didn’t understand him, but asked no further questions, thinking
that was the best way to get this unsociable man talking. Here in the
darkness, returning no answer was almost provocative. And indeed,
after a while the driver asked him: ‘Like a cognac?’ ‘Yes,’ said K.,
without stopping to think and much tempted by the oﬀer, because he
was shivering with cold. ‘Open up the sleigh door, then,’ said the
driver. ‘There are several bottles in the side pocket. Take one out,
have a drink, and then hand it to me. It’s too diﬃcult for me to climb
down myself wearing this fur.’ K. did not much care for lending a
hand in this way, but he had let himself in for conversation with the
driver, so he complied, even at the risk of being found by Klamm
beside the sleigh. He opened the big door and could have taken the

bottle straight out of the pocket ﬁtted inside it, but now that the door
was open he felt an irresistible urge to get into the sleigh; he would
sit there just for a moment. He quickly climbed in. The warmth
inside the sleigh was extraordinary, and it stayed warm even though
the door, which K. dared not close, was wide open. You didn’t know
if you were sitting on a seat or not as you half-lay there so comfortably among rugs, cushions, and furs; you could turn and stretch on
all sides, and everywhere you sank into the soft warmth. Arms
outstretched, head supported on the cushions ready in place for it,
K. looked out of the sleigh at the dark building. Why was it taking
Klamm so long to come down? As if numbed by the warmth after
standing in the snow for so long, K. wished that Klamm really would
arrive at last. The idea that it would be better not to be found by
Klamm in his present position did occur to him, but not very clearly,
just as a faint anxiety. He was encouraged in this oblivious state by
the behaviour of the driver, who must know that he was inside the
sleigh and was letting him stay there without even demanding the
cognac. That was considerate of him, but K. wanted to do the man
some little service, so moving slowly and without changing his position he reached for the side pocket, but not the one in the open door,
which was too far away; instead he reached for the closed door
behind him, and it came to the same thing, for there were bottles in
the side pocket there too. He took one out, unscrewed the top, and
sniﬀed it. Instinctively he smiled; the smell was as sweet and delightful as hearing praise and kind words from someone you love, and you
don’t know why, nor do you want to know, you are just happy to
hear the beloved person uttering them. Can this really be cognac?
K. wondered, tasting it out of curiosity. Yes, it was cognac, remarkably enough, burning and warming him. But as he drank it, it turned
from something that was little more than the vehicle of sweet
perfumes into a drink more suitable for a driver. Is it possible? K.
wondered again, as if reproving himself, and he drank once more.
Then—K. was just in the middle of taking a long draught—it was
suddenly bright, electric light had been switched on indoors on the
staircase, in the corridor, in the entrance hall, and outside above the
entrance itself. Steps were heard coming downstairs, the bottle
dropped from K.’s hand, cognac was spilt over a fur, and K. jumped
out of the sleigh. He just had time to close the door, which made a loud
bang, and next moment a gentleman came slowly out of the building.

The one consolation seemed to be that it wasn’t Klamm—or was that
in fact to be regretted? It was the gentleman whom K. had already
seen at the ﬁrst-ﬂoor window. A young gentleman, very good-looking,
with a pink-and-white complexion, but extremely grave. K. looked
at him gloomily, but the gloom was on his own behalf. If only he
had sent his assistants here instead; they too might have behaved
as he had. Facing him, the gentleman remained silent, as if there
wasn’t enough breath in his broad barrel of a chest for what had
to be said. ‘This is terrible,’ he remarked at last, pushing his hat a
little way back from his forehead. What was this? It wasn’t likely that
the gentleman knew K. had been in the sleigh, but he thought something or other was terrible. Perhaps it was K.’s making his way into
the yard? ‘How do you come to be here?’ asked the gentleman in a
softer voice, breathing out with a sigh of resignation. What questions! What answers! Was K. to speak up himself and expressly
conﬁrm to this gentleman that the errand on which he had set out
so full of hope had been for nothing? Instead of replying, K. turned
to the sleigh, opened it, and retrieved his cap, which he had left
inside. He noticed, to his chagrin, that cognac was dripping over the
running-board.
Then he turned back to the gentleman; he had no scruples now
about showing that he had been in the sleigh. After all, it wasn’t the
end of the world. If he were asked, but only then, he would not conceal the fact that the driver himself had at least encouraged him to
open the sleigh door. The worst of it, however, was that the gentleman had taken him by surprise and there hadn’t been time to hide
from him so that he could go on waiting for Klamm undisturbed, or
that he hadn’t had the presence of mind to stay in the sleigh, close
the door, and wait for Klamm lying on the furs there, or at least stay
in it until this gentleman was close. Of course, he couldn’t know
whether Klamm himself might not now turn up, in which case it
would naturally have been much better to encounter him outside the
sleigh. Yes, there was a good deal to think about in all this, but not
now, for this particular venture of his was over.
‘Come with me,’ said the gentleman, not really in a commanding
tone; the sense of command lay not in his words but in the brief and
intentionally indiﬀerent gesture that accompanied them. ‘I’m waiting
for someone,’ said K., just on principle rather than hoping for any
success now. ‘Come with me,’ repeated the gentleman, undeterred,

as if to show he had never doubted that K. was waiting for someone.
‘But then I’ll miss the man I’m waiting for,’ said K., shrugging. In
spite of what had happened, he felt that something had so far been
gained, something that he only apparently possessed, to be sure, but
he didn’t have to give up at anyone’s request. ‘Go or stay, you’ll miss
him anyway,’ said the gentleman, giving his opinion rather brusquely,
but showing striking forbearance for K.’s train of thought. ‘Then I’d
rather wait here and miss him,’ said K. deﬁantly. He wasn’t going to
be driven from this place by mere words from this young gentleman.
Thereupon the gentleman, with an expression of superiority on his
face, closed his eyes for a while as he put his head back, as if returning from K.’s foolishness to his own good sense, ran the tip of the
tongue over his lips with his mouth slightly open, and then told the
driver: ‘Unharness the horses.’
The driver, obeying the gentleman but giving K. a nasty look, had
to climb down in his heavy fur, and very hesitantly, as if expecting
not a change of orders from his master but a change of mind on K.’s
part, he began leading the horses and the sleigh backwards, closer to
the side wing where the stables and carriage-house obviously lay
behind a large gate. K. found himself left alone; on one side the
sleigh was moving away and so, on the other side, was the young
man, going back the way that K. had come, although they both went
very slowly, as if to show K. that it was still in his power to fetch
them back.
Perhaps he did have that power, but it would have been no use to
him; fetching the sleigh back meant banishment for himself. So he
stayed put, the only claimant to occupation of this place still left here,
but it was a joyless victory. He looked alternately at the gentleman and
the driver as they went away. The gentleman had already reached the
door through which K. had entered the yard in the ﬁrst place, and he
glanced back once more. K. thought he saw him shake his head at
such obstinacy. Then he turned away with a last brief and determined movement and stepped into the entrance hall, disappearing at
once. The driver stayed in the yard a little longer; he had a lot of
work to do with the sleigh. He had to open the heavy gate to the
stable, get the sleigh backwards through it to its proper place, unharness the horses and lead them to their manger, and he did all this
very gravely, entirely absorbed in himself, since he had no prospect
now of driving away soon. All this busy, silent activity, done without

so much as a look askance at K., seemed to K. himself far more of a
reproach than the gentleman’s behaviour. And when, having ﬁnished
his work in the stables, the driver crossed the yard with his slow,
swaying gait, opened the big gate, then came back, all the time moving with slow formality and keeping his eyes bent on his own tracks
in the snow, shut himself into the stable, and put out all the electric
lights—why would they be left on for anyone now?—and the only
remaining light came through the gap in the wooden gallery above,
catching the wandering eye for a moment, it seemed to K. as if all
contact with him had been cut, and he was more of a free agent than
ever. He could wait here, in a place usually forbidden to him, as long
as he liked, and he also felt as if he had won that freedom with more
eﬀort than most people could manage to make, and no one could
touch him or drive him away, why, they hardly had a right even to
address him. But at the same time—and this feeling was at least as
strong—he felt as if there were nothing more meaningless and more
desperate than this freedom, this waiting, this invulnerability.

9
Opposition to Questioning
He tore himself away and went back into the building, not along the
wall this time, but through the middle of the snow. In the entrance
hall he met the landlord, who greeted him in silence and pointed to
the door of the bar, and followed the direction in which he was
pointed, because he was freezing and wanted to see other human
beings; but he was very disappointed when he saw the young gentleman sitting at a little table which had probably been put there specially for him, because usually casks were used for seating. In front
of the gentleman—a sight that dismayed K.—stood the landlady of
the Bridge Inn. Pepi, looking proud with her head thrown back, her
smile always the same and standing very much on her dignity, her
braid shaking whenever she turned, was hurrying back and forth
bringing beer and then pen and ink, for the gentleman had spread
papers out in front of him, was comparing what he found now in one
of them, then in another at the far end of the table, and then he set
about writing. Looking down from her full height, and with her lips
slightly pursed as if at rest, the landlady was keeping an eye on the
gentleman and his papers, as if she had already said all she needed to
say, and it had been well received. ‘Ah, Mr Land Surveyor,’ said the
gentleman, looking up for a moment when K. came in, and then he
immersed himself in his papers again. The landlady too just glanced
at K. with an indiﬀerent expression, showing no surprise at all.
However, Pepi seemed to notice K. only when he stepped up to the
bar counter and ordered a cognac.
K. leaned on the counter, put his hand to his eyes, and took no
more notice of anything. Then he sipped the cognac, and pushed it
away; it was undrinkable. ‘All the gentlemen drink it,’ said Pepi
brieﬂy, poured the rest away, washed the little glass, and put it back
in the cupboard. ‘The gentlemen must have better cognac too,’ said
K. ‘Maybe,’ said Pepi, ‘but I don’t.’ K. had no answer to that, and
she went back to serving the young gentleman, but he needed nothing. She could only keep walking up and down behind him, respectfully trying to catch a glimpse of the papers over his shoulders, but

it was just silly curiosity and showing oﬀ, and the landlady expressed
her disapproval by frowning.
Suddenly, however, the landlady pricked up her ears and stared
into space, listening with great concentration. K. turned. He could
hear nothing special, and no one else seemed to either, but the landlady, striding out on tiptoe, went to the door at the back leading into
the yard, looked through the keyhole, then turned to the others with
her eyes wide and her face ﬂushed, crooked a ﬁnger, and beckoned
them over. Now they too looked through the keyhole in turn,
although the landlady still had the lion’s share. But Pepi too had a
turn; the gentleman, relatively speaking, was the least interested.
Pepi and the gentleman soon came back, only the landlady kept looking, bending low, practically kneeling, you almost felt as if she were
adjuring the keyhole to let her through, for there could be nothing
left to see any more. When she ﬁnally straightened up, passed her
hands over her face, tidied her hair and took a deep breath, apparently
obliged to accustom her eyes to the room and the people here again
and reluctant to do so, K. asked: ‘Has Klamm left, then?’ He said it
not to have what he already knew conﬁrmed but to anticipate an
attack, for he rather feared he was vulnerable now. The landlady
walked past him in silence, but the gentleman said, from his little
table: ‘Yes, to be sure. Once you had left the place where you were
standing guard, Klamm was able to go out. But it’s amazing what a
sensitive gentleman he is. Did you notice, ma’am,’ he asked the landlady, ‘how nervously Klamm looked around?’ The landlady did not
seem to have noticed, but the gentleman went on: ‘Well, luckily there
was nothing left to be seen. The driver had covered up the tracks in
the snow.’ ‘The landlady here didn’t notice anything,’ said K., but
not hopefully, only annoyed by the gentleman’s remark, which was
meant to sound so ﬁnal and conclusive. ‘Perhaps I wasn’t at the keyhole just then,’ said the landlady at ﬁrst, showing that she was on the
gentleman’s side, but she wanted to do Klamm justice too, and
added: ‘Although I don’t believe Klamm is so very sensitive. We are
anxious about him, to be sure, we try to protect him, so we start by
assuming Klamm’s extreme sensitivity. That is good, and certainly
what Klamm wants. But how matters really are we don’t know. To
be sure, Klamm will never speak to someone he doesn’t want to
speak to, however much trouble that person may take and however
insuﬀerably intrusive he is, but the mere fact that Klamm will never

speak to him or give him an interview is enough. And why shouldn’t
he be able to stand the sight of someone? Well, that can’t be proved,
for it will never be put to the test.’ The gentleman nodded eagerly.
‘Of course, in principle that’s my own opinion,’ he said. ‘If I didn’t
put it quite like that, it was so that the land surveyor here would
understand me. It’s a fact, however, that when Klamm stepped
out of doors he turned in a semicircle several times, looking around
him.’ ‘Perhaps he was looking for me,’ said K. ‘Possibly,’ said the
gentleman, ‘but somehow I never hit upon that idea.’ Everyone
laughed, Pepi loudest of all, although she understood hardly any of
what was going on.
‘As we are all so merry together now,’ said the gentleman, ‘I would
like to ask you, Mr Land Surveyor, to help me complete my ﬁles by
giving me some facts.’ ‘There’s been a lot of writing here,’ said K.,
looking at the ﬁles from a distance. ‘Yes, a bad habit,’ said the gentleman, laughing again. ‘But perhaps you don’t yet know who I am.
I am Momus,* Klamm’s village secretary.’ At these words the whole
room turned very serious; although the landlady and Pepi of course
knew the gentleman well, they were still impressed by the mention
of his name and digniﬁed oﬃce. And the gentleman buried himself
in the ﬁles and began writing, as if he had said too much even for
himself to take in and wanted to avoid any extra solemnity implied
by his words, so there was nothing to be heard in the room but
the scratching of his pen. ‘What does village secretary mean?’ K.
asked after a while. Speaking for Momus, who didn’t think it appropriate to give such explanations after introducing himself, the landlady said: ‘Mr Momus is a secretary to Klamm like any of Klamm’s
other secretaries, but his oﬃce, and if I am not wrong also his oﬃcial
sphere of inﬂuence—’ here Momus shook his head vigorously as he
wrote, and the landlady corrected herself—‘well, only his oﬃce and
not his oﬃcial sphere of inﬂuence is restricted to the village. Mr Momus
deals with all Klamm’s written work that may be necessary in the
village, and is the ﬁrst to receive all petitions to Klamm coming
from the village.’ And as K., still not much impressed by all this,
looked blankly at the landlady, she added, almost awkwardly: ‘That’s
the way it’s organized; all the gentlemen from the castle have
their village secretaries.’ Momus, who in fact had been listening
much more attentively than K., added, to the landlady: ‘Most of the
village secretaries work only for one master, but I work for two,

Klamm and Vallabene.’ ‘Yes,’ said the landlady now, also remembering, and turned to K. ‘Mr Momus works for two masters, for Klamm
and for Vallabene, so he is village secretary twice over.’ ‘Twice
over—fancy that,’ said K., nodding as you might nod to a child
whom you have just heard praised and addressing Momus, who now,
leaning forward, looked up at him. If there was a certain disdain in
that nod, it either went unnoticed or actually seemed requisite. The
merits of a man from Klamm’s close circle were being presented at
length to K. of all people, deemed unworthy even to have Klamm set
eyes on him by chance, and it was done with the unconcealed intention of demanding K.’s recognition and praise. Yet K. was not in the
mood for it; having tried with all his might to get a glimpse of
Klamm, he did not rate the position of a man like Momus who could
always see Klamm particularly highly, and admiration, even envy,
were far from his mind. Klamm’s proximity in itself was not so very
much worth striving for; the point was that he, K., he alone and no
one else, was trying to get to Klamm with his own requests, not for
the sake of lingering with him but in order to get past him and go on
into the castle.
So he looked at his watch and said: ‘Well, I must be going home
now.’ Immediately the footing they were on changed in favour of
Momus. ‘Yes, indeed,’ he said. ‘Your duties as school janitor call
you. But you must give me a moment longer. Just a few brief questions.’ ‘I don’t feel like it,’ said K., moving towards the door. Momus
slammed a ﬁle down on the table and stood up. ‘In Klamm’s name,
I command you to answer my questions.’ ‘In Klamm’s name?’
repeated K. ‘Why, is he interested in my aﬀairs, then?’ ‘On that
point,’ said Momus, ‘I have no authority to judge, and I suppose you
have much less. We will both of us leave that to him. However, I command you, in the position entrusted to me by Klamm, to stay here
and answer me.’ ‘Mr Land Surveyor,’ said the landlady, joining in,
‘I won’t advise you any further. You have rejected my advice so far,
the best-meant advice that could ever be given, in the most outrageous manner, and I came here to see this gentleman, Mr Secretary
Momus—I have nothing to hide—only to inform his oﬃce in a
ﬁtting manner of your conduct and your intentions, and to protect
myself forever from any possibility of your being lodged with me
again. That’s how matters stand between us, and nothing about it
will change now. If I tell you my opinion at this point, it is not to help

you but to give Mr Secretary Momus here some slight assistance in
the onerous task of dealing with a man like you. All the same, on
account of my total candour—and I cannot be other than candid
with you, reluctant as I am to talk to you at all—all the same, you
may derive some beneﬁt from my remarks if you like. I will therefore
point out that the only way leading you to Klamm will be through
Secretary Momus’s records here. However, I don’t want to exaggerate; perhaps the path does not lead to Klamm at all, perhaps it will
come to an end long before reaching him, it all depends on the goodwill of Mr Secretary Momus. But in any case it’s the only way leading in the direction of Klamm, for you at least. And are you going to
refrain from taking that one and only path solely out of deﬁance?’
‘Oh, madam,’ said K., ‘it is not the only way to Klamm, nor is it
worth more than any other. So do you, Mr Secretary, decide whether
what I choose to say here may come to Klamm’s ears or not?’ ‘Yes,
indeed I do,’ said Momus, lowering his eyes proudly and looking to
left and to right, where there was nothing to be seen. ‘Why else
would I be his secretary?’ ‘There, you see, madam,’ said K. ‘I don’t
need a way to Klamm, only to Mr Secretary Momus.’ ‘I was going to
open that way up for you,’ said the landlady. ‘Didn’t I oﬀer, yesterday afternoon, to see that your request reached Klamm? That would
have been done through Mr Momus. But you turned my oﬀer down,
and yet there won’t be any other way for you, only that one. To be
sure, after your performance today, after your attempt to accost
Klamm, you’ll have even less chance of success. But this last small,
vanishingly small, almost non-existent hope is the only hope you
have.’ ‘How is it, madam,’ said K., ‘that at ﬁrst you tried so hard to
keep me away from Klamm, and now you take my request seriously,
and seem to consider me lost, so to speak, if my plans fail? If you
could once advise me not to try seeing Klamm at all, and do so honestly, how can you now, and equally honestly, positively urge me
forward on the path to Klamm, even if admittedly it may not lead to
him?’ ‘Urge you forward?’ said the landlady. ‘Is it urging you forward if I say that your attempts are hopeless? How brazen you
would be to go palming oﬀ the responsibility on me like that! Is it by
any chance the presence of Mr Secretary Momus that makes you
want to do it? No, Mr Land Surveyor, I am not urging you to do
anything. I can confess to only one thing, that when I ﬁrst saw you I
may have overestimated you a little. Your swift conquest of Frieda

alarmed me; I didn’t know what else you might be capable of. I wanted
to prevent further harm, and thought the only way to do it was for
me to try deterring you by dint of requests and threats. But now I
have learned to think about the whole aﬀair more calmly. You may
do as you wish. Perhaps you may leave deep footprints in the snow
out in the yard, but that will be the only result of your actions.’ ‘The
contradiction doesn’t seem to me entirely explained,’ said K., ‘but I
will be satisﬁed with having pointed it out to you. However, now,
Mr Secretary, I’ll ask you to tell me whether the landlady is right,
I mean in saying that the records you want me to help you complete
could result in my getting an interview with Klamm. If that is the
case, then I’m prepared to answer all your questions at once. Yes, if
it comes down to that I am ready for anything.’ ‘No,’ said Momus,
‘there’s no such connection. My business is only to get a precise
account of this afternoon’s events down on paper for Klamm’s village
registry. The account is drawn up already, there are just two or three
gaps I want you to ﬁll in to make sure it’s all in order. There is no
other purpose, nor can any other purpose be achieved.’ K. looked at
the landlady in silence. ‘Why are you looking at me?’ asked the landlady. ‘Isn’t that what I said myself ? He’s always like that, Mr
Secretary, he’s always like that. Falsiﬁes the information he’s given,
and then claims to have been wrongly informed. I’ve been telling him
forever, I tell him today and I always will, that he hasn’t the slightest
prospect of an interview with Klamm, and if there isn’t any prospect
of it then he won’t get one through your records. Can anything be
clearer? What’s more, let me say that those records are the only real
oﬃcial connection he can have with Klamm. That’s clear enough too,
it’s beyond all doubt. But if he doesn’t believe me and goes on and
on hoping, don’t ask me why, that he will be able to see Klamm, then
in view of the way his mind works nothing can help him but that one
and only real oﬃcial connection with Klamm, namely these records.
That’s all I said, and anyone who claims anything diﬀerent is maliciously distorting my words.’ ‘If that’s the case, madam,’ said K.,
‘then I must apologize to you, and I’ve misunderstood you, for I
thought, mistakenly as it now turns out, I had gathered from your
earlier remarks that there was in fact some kind of hope for me, however small.’ ‘Exactly,’ said the landlady, ‘just as I was saying. You’re
twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite direction. In
my view such a hope for you does exist, and it is indeed to be found

solely in these records. But it is not the case that you can simply ask
Mr Secretary Momus aggressively: “If I answer your questions, can
I see Klamm?” If a child says something like that we laugh at it; if an
adult does so, it is an insult to Klamm’s oﬃce, and the secretary
kindly covered up for the insult with the elegance of his reply.
However, the hope I mean lies in the fact that through the records
you have, or perhaps you may have, a kind of connection with
Klamm. Isn’t that hope enough? If you were asked what merits you
possess to make you worthy of the gift of such a hope, could you
come up with the slightest thing? To be sure, nothing more precise
can be said about that hope, and Mr Secretary Momus in particular
will never be able to give the faintest hint of such a thing in his oﬃcial
capacity. For him, as he said, it is merely a matter of an account of
this afternoon, to make sure that everything’s in order, and he will
say no more even if you ask him here and now about it with reference
to my remarks.’ ‘Very well, Mr Secretary,’ said K., ‘will Klamm read
these records?’ ‘No,’ said Momus, ‘why would he? Klamm can’t read
all the records, in fact he never reads any of them. “Oh, don’t come
pestering me with your records!” he often says.’ ‘Mr Land Surveyor,’
wailed the landlady, ‘you really are exhausting me with such questions. Is it necessary, is it even desirable, for Klamm to read the
records and have a word-by-word account of the petty details of your
life? Would you not rather beg humbly for the records to be kept
from Klamm, although that request would be as unreasonable as the
ﬁrst, for who can keep anything from Klamm, but at least it would
be evidence of a change of heart in you? And is it necessary for what
you call your hope? Haven’t you said yourself that you would be
happy if you just had a chance to speak in front of Klamm, even if he
didn’t look at you or listen to you? And will you not at least achieve
that through these records, and perhaps much more?’ ‘Much more?’
asked K. ‘How?’ ‘If only’, cried the landlady, ‘you weren’t forever
wanting to have everything presented to you ready on a plate, like a
child! Who can answer such questions? The records go into Klamm’s
village registry, as you’ve heard, no more can be said about the
matter for certain. I mean, do you know the whole signiﬁcance of the
records, of Mr Secretary Momus, of the village registry? Do you
know what it means for Mr Secretary Momus to question you?
It’s possible, even probable, that he doesn’t know himself. He sits
quietly here doing his duty to make sure, as he said, that everything

is in order. You should remember that Klamm has appointed him,
that he works in Klamm’s name, that what he does, even if it never
reaches Klamm, is approved by Klamm from the ﬁrst. And how can
something be approved by Klamm from the ﬁrst if it isn’t imbued
with his own spirit? Far be it from me to oﬀer Mr Secretary Momus
blatant ﬂattery, he himself would deplore it, I am not talking of his
individual personality but of what he is when acting with Klamm’s
approval, as he is now. He is a tool in Klamm’s hand, and if someone
won’t do as he wants, well, that’s just too bad.’
K. was not afraid of the landlady’s threats, and he was tired of the
hopes in which she was trying to entangle him. Klamm was far away;
the landlady had once compared Klamm to an eagle, which had
struck K. as ridiculous at the time, but not any more; he thought of
Klamm’s remote distance, his impregnable residence, his silence,
perhaps interrupted only by such screams as K. had never heard. He
thought of Klamm’s piercing glance from on high that would brook
no contradiction and couldn’t be tested either, of the immutable
circles in which he soared, free from any interference by the likes of
K. down below, moving by inscrutable laws and visible only for brief
moments—Klamm and the eagle had all this in common. It was a
fact, however, that the records over which Momus was crumbling a
salted pretzel at this moment had nothing to do with any of this. He
was enjoying the pretzel with his beer, scattering salt and crumbs all
over the papers.
‘Well, good night,’ said K. ‘I have a rooted dislike of any kind of
questioning.’ And he was on his way to the door. ‘Is he going, then?’
Momus asked the landlady, almost anxiously. ‘He’ll never dare,’ said
the landlady. But K. heard no more; he was already out in the
entrance hall. It was cold, and there was a strong wind blowing. The
landlord, who seemed to have been keeping watch on the hall
through some peephole, came through a doorway. Even here in the
front hall the wind was tearing so hard at his coat-tails that he had to
clutch them tightly around him. ‘So you’re oﬀ already, Mr Land
Surveyor?’ he said. ‘Are you surprised?’ asked K. ‘Well, yes,’ said the
landlord. ‘Haven’t you been questioned?’ ‘No,’ said K. ‘I wasn’t
letting anyone question me.’ ‘Why not?’ asked the landlord. ‘I really
don’t know why I should let myself be questioned,’ said K., ‘why I
should go along with a joke or some oﬃcial whim. And perhaps I’d
have dismissed it as just a joke or a whim another time, but not today.’

‘Why no, to be sure,’ said the landlord, but he was agreeing only out
of civility, not from conviction. ‘Well, I must let the servants into the
bar now,’ he added. ‘They were supposed to start serving there
long ago, I just didn’t want to disturb the hearing.’ ‘You thought it
so important?’ asked K. ‘Oh yes,’ said the landlord. ‘Then you
think I ought not to have refused to answer questions?’ asked K.
‘No,’ said the landlord, ‘you ought not.’ And as K. said nothing, he
added, whether to console K. or to get on with the work in the bar
more quickly: ‘Well, well, that doesn’t mean we’ll necessarily see ﬁre
and brimstone* raining down from the sky.’ ‘No, to be sure,’ K.
agreed. ‘The weather doesn’t look like that at all.’ And they parted,
laughing.

10
On the Road
K. went out on the steps up to the inn, where the wind was blowing
wildly, and peered into the darkness. It was appalling weather. The
thought of that somehow made him remember how hard the landlady had tried to make him comply and help to complete the records,
and how he had stood up to her. She hadn’t, of course, been making
an honest effort; secretly she had been dissuading him at the same
time, so after all he didn’t really know whether he had stood ﬁrm or
given in. Hers was a nature made for intrigue, apparently working
for no purpose, like the wind, according to strange and distant orders
of which no one ever got a sight.
No sooner had he taken a few steps along the road than he saw two
lights swaying in the distance. This sign of life cheered him, and he
hurried towards the lights, which themselves were moving towards
him. He didn’t know why he was so disappointed when he recognized
the assistants; however, there they were coming his way, probably
sent by Frieda, and he supposed the lanterns that freed him from the
darkness in which the wind roared all around him were his own
property. All the same, he was disappointed, for he had expected
someone new, not these old acquaintances who were such a nuisance
to him. But the assistants were not on their own; walking between
them, Barnabas emerged from the darkness. ‘Barnabas,’ cried K.,
oﬀering his hand. ‘Were you coming to ﬁnd me?’ The surprise of this
meeting at ﬁrst made K. forget all the trouble that Barnabas had
caused him. ‘Yes, indeed I was coming to ﬁnd you,’ said Barnabas,
with his old friendly manner, ‘with a letter from Klamm.’ ‘A letter
from Klamm!’ said K., putting his head back and taking it swiftly
from Barnabas’s hand. ‘Give me some light!’ he told the assistants,
who came close to him on his right and left and raised their lanterns.
K. had to fold the large sheet of notepaper very small to protect it
from the wind. Then he read: ‘To the Land Surveyor at the Bridge
Inn. I appreciate the surveys you have carried out so far. The work
of your assistants is praiseworthy too; you know how to keep them
busy. Do not desist from your zealous labours! Bring the work

to a happy conclusion! Any interruption would be irksome to me.
Furthermore, rest assured that the matter of your remuneration will
be decided very soon. I am keeping an eye on you.’ K. did not look
up from the letter until the assistants, who had been reading much
more slowly than he did, gave three loud cheers to celebrate the good
news. ‘Calm down,’ he told them, and added, to Barnabas: ‘This is a
misunderstanding.’ Barnabas didn’t know what he meant. ‘It’s a misunderstanding,’ repeated K., and all this afternoon’s weariness came
back to him. The way to the schoolhouse seemed so long, Barnabas’s
whole family loomed in the background, and the assistants were still
crowding K. so close that he elbowed them out of the way. How
could Frieda have sent them to meet him when he had ordered them
to stay with her? He would have found the way home by himself, and
more easily than in this company. What was more, one of the assistants had wound a scarf around his neck, its free ends were ﬂuttering
in the wind and had blown into K.’s face several times. The other
assistant kept removing the scarf from K.’s face at once with his long,
pointed, nimble ﬁngers, but that did nothing to improve matters.
Both of them actually seemed to have enjoyed this going back and
forth, and they were all worked up by the wind and the wild night.
‘Go away!’ shouted K. ‘If you were going to come and meet me, why
didn’t you bring my stick? What am I going to use now to drive you
home?’ They ducked behind Barnabas, but they were not so frightened that they didn’t ﬁrst place their lanterns on their protector’s
shoulders to right and left. He shook them oﬀ at once. ‘Barnabas,’
said K., and it depressed him to see that Barnabas clearly didn’t
understand him, and that while at times of calm his jacket might look
very smart there was no help to be found in him when matters were
serious, only mute resistance, and there was no resisting that resistance either, for Barnabas himself was defenceless, only his smile
shone, but that was as little help as the stars up there against the
stormy wind down here below. ‘See what the gentleman says to me,’
said K., holding the letter in front of Barnabas’s face. ‘The gentleman has been misinformed. I have not carried out any surveys, and
you can see for yourself what my assistants are worth. I clearly can’t
interrupt work that I am not doing, I can’t even be irksome to the
gentleman, so how could I have earned his appreciation? And I feel I
can never rest assured of anything.’ ‘I’ll go and pass that message
on,’ said Barnabas, who had been looking past the letter all this time.

He couldn’t have read it anyway, for K. was holding it very close to
his face. ‘Oh yes?’ said K. ‘You promise to pass on what I tell you,
but can I really believe you? I need a trustworthy messenger so
much—now more than ever!’ And K. bit his lip impatiently. ‘Sir,’
said Barnabas, bending his neck slightly in a way that almost tempted
K. to believe in him again, ‘sir, I will certainly pass on what you say,
and I will certainly deliver that last message you gave me too.’
‘What?’ cried K. ‘You mean you haven’t delivered it yet? Didn’t you
go up to the castle next day?’ ‘No,’ said Barnabas, ‘my dear father is
an old man, you’ve seen him yourself, and there was a lot of work at
home, I had to help him, but I’ll soon be going up to the castle again.’
‘But what are you thinking of, you extraordinary fellow?’ cried K.,
clapping a hand to his forehead. ‘Doesn’t Klamm’s business
come before everything else? You hold the high oﬃce of a messenger,
and is this how you ﬁll it? Who cares about your father’s work?
Klamm is waiting for news, and instead you prefer to muck out
the stable!’ ‘My father is a shoemaker,’ said Barnabas, undeterred.
‘He had orders from Brunswick, and I’m my father’s journeyman.’
‘Shoemaker—orders—Brunswick,’ cried K. grimly, as if conclusively dismissing each of those words for ever. ‘So who here needs
boots on roads that are always empty? And what do I care for all this
stuﬀ about shoemakers? I didn’t give you a message to be consigned
to oblivion and confusion on the shoemaker’s bench, but so that you
could deliver it to the gentleman straight away.’ Here K. calmed
down a little, for it occurred to him that all this time Klamm had
probably not been in the castle but at the Castle Inn. However,
Barnabas aroused his ire again when he began reciting K.’s ﬁrst
message to show how well he remembered it. ‘All right, that’ll do,’
said K. ‘Don’t be angry, sir,’ said Barnabas, and as if unconsciously
he meant to punish K. he looked away from him and down, but it was
probably in dismay at the way K. was shouting. ‘I’m not angry with
you,’ said K., and indeed, now his anger was turned against himself.
‘Not with you personally, but it’s not a good thing for me to have no
one but such a messenger for my important business.’ ‘Well, you
see,’ said Barnabas—and it appeared that in his anxiety to defend his
honour as a messenger he was saying more than he ought to—‘it’s
like this. Klamm doesn’t wait for messages, in fact he’s quite cross
when I bring them. “More messages again,” he says, and when he
sees me coming in the distance he usually stands up, goes into the

next room, and won’t receive me. And it’s not a settled thing that I’m
to come at once with every message—if it was a settled thing of
course I’d go there at once, but it’s not settled, and if I never came
with a message no one would remind me to. If I bring a message I do
it of my own free will.’ ‘Very well,’ said K., observing Barnabas and
deliberately looking away from the assistants, who slowly took turns
to rise as if from the depths behind Barnabas’s shoulders, and then
bob quickly down again with a slight whistle imitating the wind, as if
alarmed by the sight of K. They amused themselves like that for
some time. ‘Very well, I don’t know how Klamm may feel, but I
doubt whether you can know about everything up there in detail, and
even if you could there’d be nothing we could do to improve matters.
But you can carry a message, and that’s what I ask you to do. A very
short message. Can you take it tomorrow, and bring me the answer
tomorrow too, or at least tell me how you were received? Can you
and will you do that? It would be of great value to me. And perhaps
I’ll get a chance yet to thank you properly, or perhaps you already
have a wish that I can grant.’ ‘I will certainly take your message,’ said
Barnabas. ‘And will you try to carry it as well as possible, to give it
to Klamm himself, to get the answer from Klamm himself and do it
all tomorrow, tomorrow morning. Will you do that?’ ‘I’ll do my
best,’ said Barnabas. ‘I always do.’ ‘Well, we won’t quarrel about it
any more,’ said K. ‘This is the message: K. the land surveyor asks the
chief executive, Oﬃce X, to allow him to speak to him in person; he
undertakes from the outset to accept any condition attached to such
permission. He is forced to make this request because so far all intermediaries have failed entirely, and as proof of this he would like to
mention that he has not yet carried out any surveys at all, and from
what the village mayor says he never will; it was therefore with
despair and shame that he read the last letter from the chief executive, and only a personal interview with the chief executive can
help him here. The land surveyor knows how much he is asking,
but he will do all he can to cause the chief executive as little trouble
as possible, he will agree to any restriction on the time of an interview, and if it is thought necessary he will agree to use only a set
number of words in it. He thinks he could manage with ten words.
With deep respect and the greatest impatience, he awaits the decision.’ Forgetting himself, K. had spoken as if he were at Klamm’s
own door and addressing the doorkeeper. ‘Well, it came out a lot

longer than I meant,’ he added, ‘but you must carry it orally, I won’t
write a letter which would only set out on a never-ending journey
into the ﬁles.’ So K. scribbled it all on a piece of paper, for the beneﬁt
of Barnabas alone, leaning the paper on the back of one of the assistants, while the other held a light for him. However, K. was able to
write it straight out as dictated back to him by Barnabas, who had
remembered every word and recited it as meticulously as a schoolboy, taking no notice of the way the assistants were saying it all
wrong. ‘Your memory is remarkable,’ said K., giving him the paper,
‘so please show yourself remarkable in other respects too. And what
about your own wishes? Don’t you have any? I’ll say frankly, it would
reassure me a little about the fate of my message if you did want
something’. At ﬁrst Barnabas was silent, but then he said: ‘My sisters
send their regards.’ ‘Your sisters,’ said K. ‘Ah yes, those tall, strong
girls.’ ‘They both send you their regards, but particularly Amalia,’
said Barnabas. ‘And she brought me this letter from the castle for
you today too.’ Seizing upon this piece of information above all, K.
asked: ‘Then couldn’t she take my message to the castle as well? Or
couldn’t you both go and try your luck separately?’ ‘Amalia isn’t
allowed into the oﬃces,’ said Barnabas. ‘Otherwise I’m sure she’d be
happy to do it.’ ‘I may visit you tomorrow,’ said K., ‘but come to see
me yourself ﬁrst with the answer. I’ll expect you at the school. And
give my regards to your sisters too.’ K.’s words seemed to make
Barnabas very happy, and after they had shaken hands he touched K.
brieﬂy on the shoulder. As if everything was back the way it had
been when Barnabas, in all his ﬁnery, ﬁrst appeared among the locals
in the bar of the inn, K. felt that this touch, although given with a
smile, was a mark of distinction. He was less upset now, and let the
assistants do as they liked on their way back.

11
At the School
He reached home frozen. It was dark everywhere, the candles in the
lanterns had burned down, and he made his way into one of the
classrooms with the help of the assistants, who knew their way
around the place—‘Your ﬁrst praiseworthy job done,’ he told them,
remembering Klamm’s letter. Frieda, still half asleep, called from a
corner of the room: ‘Let K. sleep! Don’t disturb him!’ For K. occupied her mind even when she was so overcome by drowsiness that
she hadn’t been able to wait up for him. Now a lamp was lit, although
it couldn’t be turned up very far, for there was very little paraﬃn.
Their new household still lacked a number of things. There was
heating, but the large room, which was also used as the school
gymnasium—the gymnastic apparatus stood around and hung from
the ceiling—had already used up all the wood for the stove. K. was
assured that it had been nice and warm, but unfortunately it had now
cooled down again entirely. There was a large supply of wood in a
shed, but the shed was locked and the teacher, who would allow
ﬁrewood to be taken to heat the rooms only during school hours, had
the key. They could have put up with that if there had been beds
where they could take refuge. However, there was nothing but a
single straw mattress, neatly covered with a woollen shawl of Frieda’s
in a way that did her credit, but there was no eiderdown, and just two
stiﬀ, coarse blankets that gave hardly any warmth. The assistants
were looking covetously even at this wretched straw mattress, but of
course they had no hope of ever lying on it. Frieda looked anxiously
at K.; she had shown at the Bridge Inn that she could make even the
most miserable room ﬁt to live in, but she hadn’t been able to do
much here, entirely without any means. ‘The gymnastic apparatus is
all we have to decorate our room,’ she said, trying to smile through
her tears. As for what they needed most, beds to sleep in and fuel to
heat the room, she promised K. that she would get something done
about it next day, and asked him to wait patiently until then. Not a
word, not a hint, not a look on her face suggested that she felt the
slightest bitterness in her heart towards K., although as he couldn’t

help reﬂecting he had taken her away ﬁrst from the Castle Inn and
now from the Bridge Inn. So K. did his best to seem to ﬁnd it all
tolerable, which was not so hard for him, because in his mind he was
with Barnabas, going over his message again word by word, although
not exactly as he had given it to Barnabas but as he thought it would
sound to Klamm. At the same time, however, he was really glad of
the coﬀee that Frieda made him over a spirit-burner, and leaning
against the stove, which was now cooling oﬀ, he watched her quick
and expert movements as she spread the inevitable white tablecloth
on the teacher’s desk, which did duty as a table, put a ﬂowered coﬀee
cup on the cloth, and beside it some bread and bacon and even a
can of sardines. Now everything was ready. Frieda hadn’t eaten yet
herself, but had waited for K.’s return. There were two chairs, which
K. and Frieda drew up to the table, while the assistants sat on the
podium at their feet, but they would never keep still, even when
they were eating they were a nuisance. Although they had been
served good helpings of everything, and hadn’t nearly ﬁnished what
was on their plates, they rose from time to time to see if there was
still plenty left on the table so that they could hope for seconds. K.
took no notice of them, and only Frieda’s laughter drew his attention
to them. He covered her hand on the table aﬀectionately with his
own, and asked quietly why she let them get away with so much,
even putting up with their bad habits in a friendly way. This way, he
pointed out, they would never be rid of the assistants, while a certain
amount of stern treatment, such as their conduct deserved, might
either enable him to keep them under control or, more probably and
even better, make them dislike their position so much that in the end
they would run away. The schoolhouse here didn’t look like being a
pleasant place to live in; well, their stay wouldn’t be long, but if the
assistants weren’t around and the two of them were alone in this
quiet house they would hardly mind what was missing. Didn’t she
notice, he asked, that the assistants were getting more impertinent
every day, as if they were actually encouraged by Frieda’s presence
and the hope that K. would not attack them in front of her, as he
otherwise would? What was more, there might be a perfectly simple
means of getting rid of them at once, without much ceremony; perhaps Frieda, who knew this place so well, might even know of something. And they’d really be doing the assistants a favour if they drove
them away somehow, for the life they were leading here was not very

comfortable, and they’d have to give up, at least to some extent, the
idleness they had enjoyed so long, because they would have to work,
while Frieda must rest after all the upheavals of the last few days,
and he, K., would be busy ﬁnding a way out of their present plight.
However, if the assistants were to go, he said, he would feel so
relieved that he would easily be able to take on the duties of a school
janitor as well as everything else.
Frieda, who had listened attentively to him, slowly caressed his
arm and said that all that was her own opinion too, but perhaps he
made too much of the assistants’ bad habits; they were young fellows,
cheerful and a little simple, taken into a stranger’s service for the ﬁrst
time, away from the stern discipline of the castle and so a little surprised and excited all the time, and in that frame of mind, yes, they
did sometimes do silly things. Of course it was natural to get annoyed
about that, but it would be more sensible to laugh. Sometimes she
really couldn’t help laughing at them herself. All the same, she
entirely agreed with K., she said, that it would be better to send
them away, and then there’d be just the two of them. She moved
closer to K. and hid her face against his shoulder. And still in that
position, she said in a voice so muﬄed that K. had to bend down to
hear her, that no, she didn’t know any means of getting rid of the
assistants, and she was afraid that none of the ideas K. had suggested
would work. As far as she knew, she said, K. himself had asked for
his assistants, and now he had them and would have to keep them. It
would be a good idea simply to accept them as the lightweight couple
they were, that was the best way to put up with them, she said.
K. was not happy with this reply. Half in earnest, half joking, he
said that she seemed to be in league with them, or at least to like them
very much; well, they were good-looking young fellows, but there
was no one you couldn’t get rid of if you really put your mind to it,
and so he would show her with the assistants.
Frieda said she would be very grateful to him if he succeeded, and
promised that from now on she wouldn’t laugh at them or say an
unnecessary word to them any more. She didn’t think there was
anything to laugh at in them now, and it was really no joke to be
under observation all the time by two men; yes, she said, she had
learned to see the pair of them through his eyes. And she did jump
slightly when the assistants rose again now, partly to see how much
food was left, partly to discover what all this whispering was about.

K. took advantage of this to take Frieda’s mind oﬀ the assistants;
he drew her to him, and they ﬁnished their meal sitting close
together. It was really time to go to sleep now, and they were all
very tired; one of the assistants had actually fallen asleep over his
supper, which amused the other very much, and he kept trying to
make his master and mistress look at the sleeping man’s stupid face,
but he didn’t succeed, for K. and Frieda were sitting above him
and didn’t respond. They hesitated to drop oﬀ in the cold, which
was becoming unbearable, and ﬁnally K. said they really must have
some heating or it would be impossible to sleep. He looked for some
kind of axe. The assistants knew where to ﬁnd one, and brought it,
and now they went out to the woodshed. Its ﬂimsy door was soon
broken down, and the assistants, as delighted as if they had never
known such fun, began carrying wood into the classroom, chasing
and pushing each other about. Soon there was a great heap of it
there, the stove was lit, and everyone lay down around it. The
assistants were given one of the blankets to wrap themselves in,
which was quite enough for them, for it was agreed that one should
stay awake and keep the ﬁre going. After a while it was so warm
by the stove that the blankets weren’t even needed any more. The
lamp was put out, and K. and Frieda, happy to be warm and quiet,
lay down to sleep.
When a sound of some kind woke K. in the night, and in his ﬁrst
uncertain drowsy movement he groped around for Frieda, he found
one of the assistants lying beside him instead. This, probably as a
result of his irritable mood on being suddenly woken, was the biggest
shock he had yet had in the village. With a cry, he half rose, and in a
blind fury punched the assistant so hard with his ﬁst that the man
began shedding tears. The whole aﬀair was soon cleared up. Frieda
had been woken when some large animal—or so it had seemed to her
at least—probably a cat, jumped on her breast and then ran away
again. She had risen, and was searching the whole room for the animal with a candle. The assistant had seized his chance to enjoy lying
on the straw mattress for a little while, and now paid dearly for it.
However, Frieda could ﬁnd nothing; perhaps she had just imagined
it, and now she came back to K. On her way, as if she had forgotten
the evening’s conversation, she comfortingly stroked the whimpering assistant’s hair as he crouched on the ground. K. said nothing
about that, but he told the assistant to stop putting fuel in the stove,

for almost all the wood they had piled up was burned, and the room
was too hot now.
In the morning they none of them woke up until the ﬁrst of the
schoolchildren had arrived and were standing around the place
where they lay, full of curiosity. This was awkward, for as a result of
the heat, although now it had given way to a cool atmosphere again,
they had all undressed to their underclothes, and just as they were
beginning to get dressed Miss Gisa the assistant teacher, a tall,
blonde, handsome girl with a little stiﬀness in her manner, appeared
at the door. She was obviously prepared for the new school janitor,
and the teacher had probably told her how to treat him, for even in
the doorway she said: ‘I really can’t have this. Here’s a nice thing!
You have permission to sleep in the classroom, but that’s all; it’s not
my duty to teach the children in your bedroom. A school janitor
and his family lying in bed until the middle of the morning! Shame
on you!’
Well, K. thought he could have said a thing or two about that,
particularly on the subject of beds and his family, as he and
Frieda—the assistants were useless here, and were lying on the ﬂoor
staring at the teacher and the children—quickly pushed the parallel
bars and the vaulting-horse together, draped the blankets over them,
and so created a small room in which they could at least get dressed
away from the children’s eyes. Not that they had a moment’s peace;
ﬁrst the assistant teacher was cross because there was no fresh water
in the washbasin—K. had just been thinking of fetching the washbasin for Frieda and himself, but he gave that idea up for the time
being so as not to annoy the assistant teacher still more. However,
abandoning the notion did not help, for soon there was a great crash.
Unfortunately they had forgotten to clear away the remains of their
supper, and now Miss Gisa was sweeping it all oﬀ the teacher’s
desk with her ruler. Everything fell on the ﬂoor. The teacher wasn’t
going to bother about the fact that the oil from the sardines and the
remains of the coﬀee were spilt on the ﬂoor, and the coﬀee-pot had
broken to pieces; after all, the school janitor would clear it up. Still
not fully dressed, K. and Frieda, leaning against the gymnastic apparatus, watched the destruction of their few household goods. The
assistants, who clearly had no idea of getting dressed, peered out
from under the blankets, much to the children’s amusement. What
upset Frieda most, of course, was the loss of the coﬀee-pot, and only

when K., to comfort her, assured her that he would go straight to the
village mayor, ask for a replacement, and get one, did she pull herself
together enough to emerge from their enclosure, still in nothing but
her chemise and petticoat, to retrieve the tablecloth at least and keep
it from being soiled any further. And she succeeded, although the
teacher, trying to alarm her, kept hammering on the desk with the
ruler in a nerve-racking way. When K. and Frieda were dressed they
not only had to urge the assistants, who seemed quite dazed by these
events, to dress too, giving them orders and nudging them, they even
had to help with dressing the pair themselves. Then, when they were
all ready, K. shared out the next tasks: the assistants were to fetch
wood and heat the stoves, going ﬁrst to the stove in the other classroom, a source of great danger, for the teacher himself was probably
there now. Meanwhile Frieda would clean the ﬂoor, and K. would
fetch water and generally tidy up. They couldn’t think of having any
breakfast yet. K. wanted to emerge from their shelter ﬁrst, so as to
ﬁnd out what the assistant teacher’s temper was like in general, and
the others were to follow only when he called them. One reason why
he made this arrangement was that he didn’t want to let the situation
go straight from bad to worse because of the assistants’ silly tricks,
and another was to spare Frieda as much as possible; she had high
ambitions, he did not; she was sensitive, he was not; she thought only
of their present petty discomforts, while he was thinking of Barnabas
and the future. Frieda did all he said and hardly took her eyes oﬀ
him. No sooner had he stepped out into the room than the assistant
teacher asked, to the accompaniment of laughter from the children
which seemed as if it would never stop: ‘Oh, had your sleep out, have
you?’ When K. ignored this, for it was not a real question, and
instead made for the washstand, Miss Gisa asked: ‘Whatever have
you been doing to my kitty?’ For a large, fat old cat lay stretched out
on the washstand, and Miss Gisa was examining one paw, which was
obviously slightly injured. So Frieda had been right; the cat had not
actually jumped on her, for it probably couldn’t jump any more, but
it had clambered over her, was alarmed to ﬁnd people in the usually
empty schoolhouse, and had hidden in a hurry, hurting itself in its
unwonted haste. K. tried to explain all this calmly to Miss Gisa, but
she saw only the outcome of this course of events and said: ‘You’ve
hurt my kitty, that’s how you start your work here. Look at this!’
And she called K. up to the desk, showed him the paw, and before

he knew what she was about she had run it over the back of his hand,
scratching him. The cat’s claws were blunt, to be sure, but Miss
Gisa, without thought for the cat itself, had pressed them down so
hard that they left bloody weals. ‘Now, get on with your work,’ she
said impatiently, bending over the cat again. Frieda, who had been
watching with the assistants from behind the apparatus, screamed at
the sight of the blood. K. showed the children his hand and said:
‘There, just see what a nasty, sneaking cat did to me.’ Of course
he didn’t really mean that for the children, whose screams and
laughter had now become so independent of all else that they needed
nothing more to set them oﬀ, and no words could get through to
them or make them do anything. But when Miss Gisa herself
answered this retort only with a brief glance at him, and went on
tending the cat, having apparently satisﬁed her ﬁrst spurt of anger by
inﬂicting the scratch on him, K. called to Frieda and the assistants
and they began work.
When K. had taken out the bucket of dirty water, fetched fresh
water, and now began sweeping the schoolroom, a boy of about
twelve rose from one bench, touched K.’s hand, and in all the noise
said something he couldn’t make out at all. Then the racket suddenly
stopped. K. turned. Here was what he had feared all morning. The
teacher, small man that he was, stood in the doorway holding an
assistant by the collar with each hand. He had probably caught them
fetching ﬁrewood, for he thundered in a mighty voice, pausing after
every word: ‘Who has dared to break into the woodshed? Where is
the fellow? Let me crush him as he deserves!’ Here Frieda rose from
the ﬂoor, which she was trying to wash around Miss Gisa’s feet,
looked at K. as if to draw strength from the sight, and said, with
something of her old dignity in her voice and bearing: ‘I did, sir.
I couldn’t think of anything else to do. If the classrooms were to be
heated at all this morning, we had to open the shed, and I dared not
come to you for the key at night. My ﬁancé had gone to the Castle
Inn, it was possible that he might spend the night there, so I had to
make the decision for myself. If I did wrong you must forgive my
inexperience. I was scolded hard enough by my ﬁancé when he
saw what had happened. In fact he even forbade me to heat the
rooms early, because he thought your locking the woodshed showed
that you didn’t want them heated until you had arrived yourself. So
the fact that they aren’t heated is his fault, but breaking into the

woodshed is mine.’ ‘Who broke down the door?’ the teacher asked
the assistants, who were still trying to shake oﬀ his grip, but in vain.
‘That gentleman,’ they both said, and pointed to K., thus leaving the
matter in no doubt. Frieda laughed, and this laughter seemed even
more convincing than her words. Then she began to wring out the
rag she had been using to wash the ﬂoor in the bucket, as if her explanation were the end of the incident, and what the assistants said was
just a passing joke. Only when she was kneeling down again to get on
with the work did she say: ‘Our assistants are like mere children,*
and in spite of their years they still belong on those school benches.
I broke down the door with the axe by myself yesterday evening.
It was perfectly simple, and I didn’t need the assistants to help me.
They would only have been in the way. But then, in the night, my
ﬁancé came back and went out to see the damage and repair it if
possible, and the assistants went with him, probably fearing to stay
here on their own; they saw my ﬁancé working on the broken door,
and that’s why they say what they do now—as I said, they are just
children at heart.’ While the assistants kept shaking their heads as
Frieda gave her explanation, pointed to K. again, and tried but failed
to make Frieda change her mind through mute pantomime, they
ﬁnally gave in, took Frieda’s words as an order, and did not reply to
another question from the teacher. ‘Well then,’ the teacher said to
them, ‘so you were lying? Or at least, you blamed the school janitor
out of carelessness?’ They were still silent, but their trembling and
their anxious glances seemed to show that they knew they were to
blame. ‘Then I shall give you a sound thrashing on the spot,’ said the
teacher, and he sent a child into the other room to fetch his cane.
When he raised it, Frieda cried: ‘Oh no, the assistants were telling
the truth!’ and ﬂung her rag desperately into the bucket, making the
water splash up. Then she ran behind the apparatus and hid there.
‘What a pack of liars,’ said Miss Gisa, who had just ﬁnished bandaging the cat’s paw, and now took the animal on her lap, for which it
was almost too large.
‘So that leaves us with the school janitor,’ said the teacher, pushing the assistants away and turning to K., who had been listening and
leaning on his broom all this time. ‘The school janitor, who is cowardly enough to let others take the blame for his own shabby tricks.’
‘Well,’ said K., noticing that Frieda’s intervention had in fact moderated the teacher’s ﬁrst fury, ‘if the assistants had been given a bit of

a thrashing it wouldn’t have bothered me; they’ve been let oﬀ scot
free a dozen times when they deserved it, so they might as well pay
for that with a thrashing on one occasion when they don’t. However,
there are other reasons why I’d have been glad to avoid a direct clash
between you and me, sir. And perhaps you’d have been glad too. But
since Frieda has sacriﬁced me for the sake of the assistants,’ said K.,
pausing—and in the silence Frieda could be heard sobbing behind
the blankets—‘we must of course have the whole thing out in the
open.’ ‘Outrageous,’ said the assistant teacher. ‘I entirely agree with
you, Miss Gisa,’ said the teacher. ‘You are of course dismissed as
school janitor on the spot for this shameful dereliction of duty.
I reserve the right to decide what punishment will follow, but now
get out of this house at once, with all your belongings. It will be a
great relief to us, and we’ll be able to begin lessons at last. So hurry
up!’ ‘I’m not moving from this place,’ said K. ‘You are my superior
here, but it wasn’t you who appointed me to this post, that was the
mayor, and I’m accepting notice only from him. And nor did he
appoint me for my household and me to freeze to death in this place,
but—as you yourself have said—to keep me from any rash acts that
I might commit in my desperation. So dismissing me now out of
hand would directly contravene his intentions, and until I hear otherwise from the mayor himself I won’t believe it. What’s more, it will
probably be very much to your advantage if I don’t go along with
your thoughtless dismissal of me.’ ‘You mean you won’t go?’ said the
teacher. K. shook his head. ‘Think it over carefully,’ said the teacher.
‘Your decisions aren’t always the wisest; think, for instance, of yesterday afternoon when you declined to answer questions at a hearing.’ ‘Why do you mention that now?’ asked K. ‘Because I feel like
it,’ said the teacher, ‘and now, for the last time, I repeat: get out of
here!’ But when that too had no eﬀect, the teacher went to Miss
Gisa’s desk and consulted his assistant quietly. She said something
about the police, but the teacher wouldn’t have that, and ﬁnally they
came to an agreement. The teacher told the children to go over to his
classroom, and they would be taught their lessons with the other set
of children, a change which delighted them all. The room was
cleared amidst laughter and shouting, with the teacher and his assistant bringing up the rear. Miss Gisa was carrying the class register,
with the corpulent and totally apathetic cat lying on it. The teacher
himself would rather have left the cat behind, but a suggestion to that

eﬀect was rejected so ﬁrmly by Miss Gisa, with reference to K.’s
cruelty, that to put the lid on his oﬀences K. had now also unloaded
Miss Gisa’s cat on the teacher, a fact which probably aﬀected the last
words spoken to K. by the teacher as he stood in the doorway. ‘Miss
Gisa is forced to leave this room with the children because you are
refractory and refuse to go when I dismiss you, and no one can expect
her, a young girl like that, to give lessons in the middle of your
squalid household arrangements. You will therefore be left alone,
and can do as you like in this room, undisturbed by the aversion of
all decent bystanders. But it won’t be for long, you mark my words.’
And with that he slammed the door.

12
The Assistants
As soon as they had all left K. told the assistants: ‘Go away, you two!’
Surprised by this unexpected order, they obeyed, but when K.
locked the door behind them they tried to get back in, and stood outside whimpering and knocking. ‘You’re dismissed!’ cried K. ‘I’m never
going to take you back into my service.’ They were not at all happy
with that, and hammered on the door with their hands and feet. ‘Let
us back in, sir!’ they cried, as if K. were dry land and they were sinking in a river nearby. But K. was ruthless. He waited impatiently for
the ghastly noise to force the teacher to intervene, and so he soon did.
‘Let your damned assistants in!’ he shouted. ‘I’ve dismissed them,’
K. shouted back, which had the unintended side-eﬀect of showing
the teacher what happened when you were strong enough not just to
give people notice but to make sure they actually went. The teacher
tried to soothe the assistants by speaking kindly to them, telling them
just to wait here—after all, K. would have to let them in again. Then
he went away. And all might have remained quiet if K. hadn’t started
shouting at the assistants again, telling them they were dismissed
once and for all, without the slightest hope of being taken back again.
Thereupon they began making as much noise as before. Back came
the teacher, but he didn’t reason with them any more, he drove them
out of the house, obviously with that much-feared cane.
Soon they reappeared outside the windows of the school gymnasium, knocking on the panes and shouting, but their words could no
longer be made out. They didn’t stay there very long, however; they
couldn’t jump about in the deep snow well enough to express their
profound uneasiness. So they hurried to the fence around the school
garden, climbed up on its stone base, from which they had a better
view into the room, although only from a distance, ran along the
base, clinging to the fence, and then stopped again and held their
clasped hands out pleadingly to K. They carried on like this for a
long time, ignoring the futility of their eﬀorts. As if they’d been
struck blind, they probably went on even when K. drew the curtains
over the windows to be rid of the sight of them.

In the now dim light of the room, K. went over to the gymnastic
apparatus to look for Frieda. Under his eyes she rose to her feet, tidied
her hair, dried her face, and in silence put some coﬀee on to heat.
Although she knew it, K. told her formally that he had dismissed the
assistants. She just nodded. K. sat down on one of the school benches
and observed her weary movements. It had been her sprightliness
and determination that lent beauty to her meagre body, and now that
beauty was gone. A few days of living with K. had been enough to do
it. Her work in the bar of the inn had not been easy, but she had
probably liked it better. Or was her removal from Klamm’s sphere
the real reason for her decline? It was the proximity of Klamm that
had made her so ridiculously enticing, and enticed as he was, K. had
swept her into his arms, where she was now withering away.
‘Frieda,’ said K. She immediately put the coﬀee-mill down and
came over to K. on the bench. ‘Are you cross with me?’ she asked.
‘No,’ said K. ‘I think you can’t help it. You were living happily at the
Castle Inn. I ought to have left you there.’ ‘Yes,’ said Frieda, looking
sadly into space. ‘You ought to have left me there. I am not worthy
to live with you. Free of me, you might be able to achieve everything
you want. It’s out of thoughtfulness for me that you submit to that
tyrannical teacher, accept this miserable job, go to so much trouble
to get an interview with Klamm. All for me, and I repay you so
poorly.’ ‘No, no,’ said K., putting his arm round her to console her.
‘All these things are petty details that don’t hurt me, and it’s not just
on your account that I want to see Klamm. Think how much you have
done for me! Before I met you I was absolutely lost here. No one
would take me in, and if I forced myself on people they soon said
goodbye. And if I could have found peace with anyone, it would have
been with those from whom I ﬂed in my turn, say Barnabas and his
family—’ ‘You did ﬂee from them, didn’t you? Oh, my dearest!’ cried
Frieda, interrupting impulsively, but then, after a hesitant, ‘Yes’ from
K., she lapsed into lethargy again. But K. himself no longer felt
enough determination to explain just how things had turned out well
for him through his connection with Frieda. He slowly removed his
arm from her waist, and they sat for a while in silence, until Frieda,
as if K.’s arm had given her a warmth that was essential to her now,
said: ‘I won’t endure this life here any more. If you want to keep me
we must go away, emigrate, go anywhere, to the south of France, to
Spain.’* ‘I can’t emigrate,’ said K. ‘I came to this place meaning to

stay here, and stay I will.’ And in a spirit of contradiction which he
didn’t even try to explain he added, as if to himself: ‘What could have
lured me to this desolate part of the country but a longing to stay
here?’ Then he added: ‘But you must want to stay here too; it’s your
own country, after all. However, you miss Klamm, and that’s what casts
you into despair.’ ‘You think I miss Klamm?’ said Frieda. ‘There’s an
excessive amount of Klamm here, there’s only too much Klamm. I
want to go so that I can get away from him. You’re the one I’d miss, not
Klamm. It’s for your sake I want to go, because I can’t get enough of
you here where everyone’s pulling me in diﬀerent directions. I’d
rather my pretty face were gone, I’d rather my body felt wretched,
just so long as I could live in peace with you.’ All that K. gathered
from this was a single point. ‘Klamm is still in touch with you, is he?’
he asked at once. ‘Does he want you to go back to him?’ ‘I don’t know
anything about Klamm,’ said Frieda, ‘it’s other people I’m talking
about now, it’s the assistants.’ ‘Oh, the assistants,’ said K. in surprise.
‘Do they pester you?’ ‘Haven’t you noticed?’ asked Frieda. ‘No,’ said
K., and tried in vain to think of any details. ‘They’re importunate,
lecherous young fellows, but no, I hadn’t noticed them pestering you.’
‘You hadn’t?’ said Frieda. ‘You mean you never noticed how there was
no getting them out of our room at the Bridge Inn, or the way they
jealously watched what we were doing together, you didn’t notice
one of them lying down in my place on the straw mattress, you didn’t
hear the things they said about you just now, hoping to drive you
away, ruin you, and be left alone with me. You never noticed any of
that?’ K. looked at Frieda without replying. No doubt her complaints
of the assistants were justiﬁed, but in view of their utterly ridiculous,
childish, restless, and intemperate nature all that could be seen in a
much more innocent light. And didn’t the way they had always done
their utmost to go everywhere with K. rather than being left alone
with Frieda disprove her accusation? K. said something of the kind.
‘Hypocrisy,’ said Frieda. ‘Didn’t you see through it? Why did you
drive them away if that wasn’t the reason?’ And she went to the window, moved the curtain a little way aside, looked out, and then called
K. over to her. The assistants were still out there by the railings; from
time to time, tired as they obviously were, they still summoned up
enough strength to raise their arms and point imploringly to the
school. One of them had attached himself by his coat to a spike in the
fence behind him so that he didn’t have to cling to it all the time.

‘Poor things! Poor things!’ said Frieda. ‘You ask why I drove them
away?’ asked K. ‘Well, you were the immediate cause.’ ‘I was?’ asked
Frieda, without taking her eyes oﬀ the scene outside. ‘Your excessively
friendly treatment of the assistants,’ said K., ‘forgiving their naughty
tricks, laughing at them, caressing their hair, feeling sorry for them
all the time. You’ve just called them “poor things, poor things”
again, and then only a little while ago you were ready to sacriﬁce me
to save the assistants from a thrashing.’ ‘That’s just it,’ said Frieda,
‘that’s what I’m talking about, that’s what makes me unhappy and
keeps me apart from you, although I know of no greater happiness
than to be with you all the time, without interruption, without end,
but I feel in my dreams that there is no place on earth where our love
can be at peace, not in the village or anywhere else, and I imagine a
deep and narrow grave where we lie embracing tightly in each other’s
arms as if in pincers, I bury my face against you, you bury yours
against me, and no one will ever see us again. But here—just look at
the assistants! It’s not you they’re pleading with when they clasp
their hands, it’s me.’ ‘Well, I don’t see that,’ said K., ‘even if you do.’
‘Indeed I do,’ said Frieda almost angrily, ‘that’s what I keep telling
you. Why else would the assistants be after me, even if they are
Klamm’s envoys—’ ‘Klamm’s envoys?’ said K., greatly surprised by
this idea, although it instantly seemed to him natural. ‘Yes, Klamm’s
envoys, to be sure,’ said Frieda, ‘but even if they are, they’re also silly
young fellows, they need a good thrashing to teach them a lesson.
What ugly, grubby lads they are, and how I hate the contrast between
their faces, from which anyone might think they were adults or
maybe students, and their foolish, childish conduct! Do you think
I don’t see that? I’m ashamed of them. And that’s just it; they don’t
actually repel me, but I’m ashamed of them. I can’t help looking at
them all the time. When I ought to be cross with them I can’t help
laughing. When they should be getting a thrashing I can’t help
caressing their heads instead. And when I lie beside you at night
I can’t sleep, and I can’t help constantly glancing across you and seeing one of them asleep, wrapped up in his blanket, and the other
kneeling in front of the stove door putting wood on the ﬁre, while I
have to bend forward so far that I almost wake you up. It’s not the cat
that scares me, either—oh, I know about cats—and I know how diﬃcult it was to sleep in the bar, where I was always being disturbed.
No, it’s not the cat that scares me, it’s myself. And it didn’t take that

monstrous cat to startle me either, I jump at the slightest little sound.
Sometimes I’m afraid you’ll wake up and it will all be over between
us, and then again I jump up and light the candle so that you will
wake up and you can protect me.’ ‘I had no idea of any of this,’ said
K. ‘Or, rather, I had a slight presentiment of it, that’s why I drove
the assistants away. But now they’re gone, so perhaps all will be
well.’ ‘Yes, they’re gone at last,’ said Frieda, but her face was anxious
and not happy. ‘Only we don’t really know who they are. I call them
Klamm’s envoys in my mind, as a game, but maybe they actually are.
Their eyes, so guileless yet sparkling, sometimes remind me of
Klamm’s. Yes, that’s it, those eyes of theirs sometimes look at me as
Klamm’s did. So it’s not quite accurate to say I’m ashamed of them.
I only wish I were. I do know that anywhere else, in other people, the
same behaviour would be stupid and repellent, but in them it’s not.
I even watch their silly tricks with respect and admiration. However,
if they’re Klamm’s envoys, then who’s going to free us from them,
and would that even be a good thing? Don’t you think you’d better
run after them, catch up with them quickly, and be glad if they came
back?’ ‘You want me to let them in again?’ asked K. ‘No, no,’ said
Frieda. ‘There’s nothing I want less. The sight of them storming in,
their delight at seeing me again, the way they’d hop about like children but reach out their arms to me like men, I might not be able to
bear any of that. But then again, when I think that by remaining so
implacable to them you may be denying Klamm himself access to
you, I know I want to protect you from the consequences of that in
any way I can. Yes, when I think of that I do want you to let them in.
So quick, let’s have them in again. Never mind me, what do I matter?
I’ll defend myself as long as I can, but if I should fail, well, then I’ll
fail knowing that I did it all for your sake.’ ‘You only conﬁrm me in
what I think of the assistants,’ said K. ‘They’ll never come in here
again with my consent. The fact that I threw them out shows that in
some circumstances they can be controlled, and what’s more, it
shows that they have nothing to do with Klamm. Only yesterday
evening I received a letter from Klamm which clearly proves that he
has been entirely misinformed about the assistants, and from that we
must conclude in turn that they are a matter of total indiﬀerence to
him, for if they were not, he would surely have known the facts about
them more accurately. Your thinking you see Klamm in them proves
nothing, because I’m sorry to say that you’re still under the landlady’s

inﬂuence, so you see Klamm everywhere. You are still more Klamm’s
lover than my wife. Sometimes that makes me very downcast, and I
feel as if I’d lost everything, it’s as if I had only just arrived in the
village, not full of hope as I really was at that time, but aware that
only disappointments await me, and I must suﬀer them one after
another to the very last. But it’s only at times I feel like that,’ added
K., smiling when he saw Frieda sinking under the eﬀect of his words,
‘and basically it’s good because it shows what you mean to me. And
if you’re going to ask me to choose between you and the assistants,
well, the assistants have lost. What an idea, choosing between you
and them! Well, now I’ll be ﬁnally rid of them. And who knows
whether we’re not both feeling rather weak just because we haven’t
had any breakfast yet?’ ‘That’s possible,’ said Frieda, with a tired
smile, and she set to work. K. himself picked up the broom again.

13
Hans
After a little while there was a quiet knock at the door. ‘Barnabas!’
cried K., throwing down his broom, and in a few strides he was at the
door. Frieda looked at him in alarm, more because of that name than
anything else. But K.’s hands were so unsteady that he couldn’t undo
the old lock of the door at once. ‘Just coming, just opening up,’ he
repeated, instead of asking who was out there knocking. And then,
having ﬂung the door wide, he saw not Barnabas coming in but the
little boy who had tried to speak to him earlier in the day. Not that
K. remembered that with any pleasure. ‘What are you doing here?’
he asked. ‘Lessons are in the classroom next door.’ ‘That’s where
I’ve come from,’ said the boy, and looked up calmly at K. with his
big brown eyes, standing very upright with his arms at his sides.
‘What do you want, then? Quick, out with it!’ said K., bending down
a little way, because the boy spoke so softly. ‘Can I help you?’ asked
the boy. ‘He wants to help us,’ K. told Frieda, and then, turning to
the boy, asked: ‘What’s your name?’ ‘Hans Brunswick,’ said the boy.
‘I’m in Class Four and my father is Otto Brunswick, the master
shoemaker who lives in Madeleine Alley.’ ‘Well, well, so your name
is Brunswick,’ said K., sounding friendlier. It turned out that Hans
had been so upset to see the bleeding scratch inﬂicted on K.’s hand
by the assistant teacher that he had made up his mind there and then
to go over to K.’s side. Now he had come from the schoolroom next
door like a deserter, risking severe punishment. Such boyish ideas
might well motivate him, but a gravity to match them was evident in
all he did. At ﬁrst, however, shyness had held him back, but soon he
felt at ease with K. and Frieda, and when he had been given some
good hot coﬀee he became lively and conﬁding. He also asked eager
questions that were very much to the point, as if he wanted to learn
the most important facts as quickly as possible so that then he could
decide for himself what was best for K. and Frieda. He was naturally
a little overbearing, but that was mingled with childish innocence so
that you felt like doing as he said half in earnest, half in jest. At any
rate, he claimed all their attention. They had stopped work, and

breakfast was going to be a long business. Although Hans sat on the
classroom bench, K. at the teacher’s desk, and Frieda in a chair near
it, it looked as if the boy were the teacher himself, testing them and
assessing their answers. A slight smile on his soft mouth seemed to
indicate that he knew it was just a game, but he took it very seriously.
Or perhaps it was not a smile but the happiness of childhood playing
around his lips. It was some time before he admitted to having seen
K. before, on the day when K. called at Lasemann’s house. K. was
pleased. ‘You were playing around at that woman’s feet, weren’t
you?’ asked K. ‘Yes,’ said Hans, ‘she’s my mother.’ And now he had
to tell them about his mother, but he did it hesitantly, and only after
being asked repeatedly, for it turned out that he was a little boy who
sometimes seemed to speak almost like a clever, energetic, and farsighted man, particularly in his questions, and perhaps anticipating
what he would be in future, or then again perhaps it was only a trick
of the senses if you were listening to him intently. But suddenly,
without any apparent transition, he was once again a schoolboy who
didn’t even understand many of the questions put to him, mistook
the meaning of others, spoke too quietly out of childish thoughtlessness, although he had often had this failing pointed out to him, and
ﬁnally, as if deﬁantly, said nothing at all in reply to many urgent
queries, entirely without embarrassment, as a grown-up man never
could be. It was as if he thought he should be the only one allowed to
ask questions, while questions asked by other people broke some rule
and were a waste of time. Then he could sit still for a long while, his
back straight and his head bent, his lower lip thrust out. Frieda
rather liked that, so much so that she often asked him questions,
hoping that they would make him adopt this silent pose. And she
sometimes succeeded, but that irked K. On the whole they learned
little: his mother was rather poorly, but it wasn’t clear just what ailed
her. The child who had been on Mrs Brunswick’s lap was Hans’s
sister and was called Frieda (Hans didn’t seem to like it that the
woman questioning him had the same name), and they all lived in the
village, but not with Lasemann. They had just been visiting his
house to take a bath, because Lasemann had that big tub, and the
small children, although Hans wasn’t one of those, specially enjoyed
bathing and playing about in it. Hans spoke of his father with respect
or even fear, but only when they weren’t also talking about his mother.
By comparison with her, his father didn’t seem to be so important,

and all questions about his family life, however they were phrased,
remained unanswered. They did learn that his father was the leading
shoemaker in the village, he had no equal, as Hans frequently
repeated, even in answer to quite diﬀerent questions. Why, he even
gave work to other shoemakers, such as Barnabas’s father, although
in that case Brunswick probably did it only as a special favour, or so
at least Hans’s proud turn of the head suggested. That made Frieda
bend down to him quickly and give him a kiss. Asked whether he had
ever been in the castle, Hans answered only after many repetitions,
and then in the negative, and when asked the same question about his
mother, he did not answer at all. Finally K. grew tired of this, for
there didn’t seem to be any point in the questioning; he thought the
boy was right, trying to worm family secrets out of an innocent child
by roundabout ways was nothing to be proud of, particularly since
they hadn’t even learned anything. When K. ﬁnally asked the boy
just what kind of help he was oﬀering, he was not surprised to hear
that Hans meant only help with the work here, so that the teacher
and Miss Gisa wouldn’t be so cross with K. any more. K. explained
that such help wasn’t necessary, the teacher was probably naturally
bad-tempered, and no one could really protect himself from that
however hard he worked. As for the work itself, he said, it wasn’t
really diﬃcult, and he was behind with it today only as a result of
unforeseen circumstances. Anyway, the teacher’s bad temper did not
aﬀect K. as much as it would a schoolboy, he shook it oﬀ easily, he
said, he was almost indiﬀerent to it. He also hoped to escape the
teacher entirely very soon. However, he thanked Hans very much for
oﬀering his help, and said he could go back to the other classroom
now, and he hoped he wouldn’t be punished. All the same, K. did
not emphasize the fact that it was only help against the teacher that
he didn’t need, he only suggested as much spontaneously, leaving the
question of other help open. Hans, clearly picking this hint up, asked
if K. might need help of a diﬀerent kind, saying that he’d be very
glad to help him, and if he couldn’t do it himself he would ask his
mother to, and then he was sure everything would be all right. When
his father was in any diﬃculty he always asked his mother for help,
he said. And his mother had already asked after K. once. She herself
hardly left the house, she had been visiting Lasemann just that once,
he said, but he, Hans, went there quite often to play with the
Lasemann children. So his mother had once asked him if the land

surveyor had been there again. It wasn’t a good idea to ask his mother
unnecessary questions, because she was so weak and tired, so he had
simply said no, he hadn’t seen the land surveyor again, and they
didn’t discuss it any further. But when Hans had found K. here in
the school, he’d had to speak to him so that he could tell his mother
about it. What his mother liked best was to have her wishes granted
without asking for that openly. In response to this K. said, after a
moment’s thought, that he didn’t need help, he had all he needed,
but it was very kind of Hans to want to help him, and he thanked
him for his good intentions. After all, it was possible that he might
need something later, and then he would turn to Hans; he knew
the address. On the other hand, perhaps he, K., could oﬀer a little
help. He was sorry to hear that Hans’s mother was not well, and
obviously no one here knew what the matter with her was; such a
case, if neglected, can turn from a mild ailment to something much
worse. He, K., had some medical knowledge, and what was even
more valuable, he had experience of treating the sick and had
been known to succeed where the doctors had failed. At home, he
said, he had been nicknamed ‘Bitter Rue’* because of his cures. At
any rate, he would happily go to see Hans’s mother and talk to her.
Perhaps he could oﬀer good advice, he’d be glad to do that for Hans’s
sake. At ﬁrst Hans’s eyes lit up at this oﬀer, which led K. to become
more pressing, but the result was unsatisfactory, for in answer to
various questions Hans said, and didn’t even sound as if he regretted
it, that no strangers could visit his mother. She had to be spared any
strain, and although K. had hardly exchanged a word with her on
that one occasion, she had taken to her bed for several days afterwards. Hans had to say that such things often happened. At the time
his father had been very angry with K., and he would certainly never
let K. visit his mother, why, his father had wanted to go to see K. to
punish him for his conduct, and only Hans’s mother had restrained
him. Most important, however, his mother herself never wanted to
speak to anyone in general, and her question about K. didn’t mark
any exception to the rule. On the contrary, when he was mentioned
she might have expressed a wish to see him, but she hadn’t, which
clearly showed what she really wanted: to hear about K. but not to
speak to him. She didn’t suﬀer from any identiﬁable illness, Hans
added, and sometimes she hinted that it was probably just the
air here that she couldn’t tolerate, but she didn’t want to leave the

village because of Hans’s father and their children, and anyway
her trouble was better than it had once been. This was roughly
what K. learned; Hans’s intellectual powers increased when it
came to shielding his mother from K., whom he had said he would
like to help. In fact with the idea of keeping K. away from his mother
in view, he contradicted much of what he had said before, for
instance about her ailment. All the same, K. realized that Hans was
still kindly disposed to him, but in thinking of his mother he forgot
everything else, anyone who wanted to see Hans’s mother was
instantly in the wrong. It was K. this time, another time it could have
been Hans’s father. K. thought he would broach that subject, and
said it was certainly very sensible of Hans’s father to protect his wife
from any kind of agitation, and if he, K., had so much as guessed at
anything of the kind when he met her he certainly wouldn’t have
ventured to speak to her. Now he would like to apologize, in retrospect, to the family at their home. On the other hand he couldn’t
quite understand why Hans’s father, if the cause of the trouble was
as obvious as Hans said, prevented the boy’s mother from recovering
in healthier air; prevented was the word for it, because it was for
the sake of Hans’s father and her children that she didn’t leave the
village. But she could take the children with her, she didn’t have to
be away for long or go very far. Even up on Castle Mount the air
must be quite diﬀerent. And surely Hans’s father didn’t have to
fear the expense of such a trip. After all, he was the most important
shoemaker in the village, and surely either he or Hans’s mother
had friends or relations at the castle who would willingly take
them in. So why didn’t he let them go? He shouldn’t underestimate
such an ailment, said K., who had seen her only ﬂeetingly, but,
struck by her pallor and weakness, had been moved to speak to her.
Even then he had wondered at the children’s father for taking
his sick wife into the musty air of the room where so many people
were washing clothes and bathing, and failing to keep his loud voice
down. He supposed Hans’s father didn’t know what it was really
about, and of course it was true his mother had seemed better
recently, such disorders come and go, but if left untreated it might
return as strongly as ever, and then nothing could be done. So if he,
K., couldn’t speak to the boy’s mother, perhaps it would be a good
idea for him to have a word with Hans’s father and point all this out
to him.

Hans had listened intently, understanding most of this and much
aﬀected by the menace latent in what he didn’t understand. All the
same, he said no, K. couldn’t speak to his father, his father had taken
a dislike to him, and would probably treat him as the teacher did. He
said this smiling shyly when he spoke of K., and bitterly and sadly
when he mentioned his father. However, he added that K. might
perhaps be able to speak to his mother after all, but only without his
father’s knowledge. Then Hans thought for a little while, his eyes
ﬁxed, like a woman contemplating something forbidden and looking
for a way to do it with impunity, and said it might be possible the day
after tomorrow, his father would be going to the Castle Inn that
evening, and then he, Hans, would come and take K. to see his
mother, always assuming that she agreed, which wasn’t very likely.
She never did anything against his father’s will, she went along with
everything he wanted, even if, as Hans could see clearly, it was
unreasonable. In fact Hans was now recruiting K. to help him against
his father; it was as if he had deceived himself in thinking he wanted
to help K., while in reality he had wanted to ﬁnd out whether, since
no one in the neighbourhood had been any help to his mother, this
stranger who had suddenly appeared and whom she had even mentioned might be able to do something. Until now it would hardly
have been possible to glean from the boy’s appearance and words
how subconsciously withdrawn and almost crafty he was! You could
gather that only from his later admissions, elicited both by chance
and intentionally. Now, in the course of his long conversation with
K., he was considering the diﬃculties to be overcome, and with the
best will in the world on Hans’s part they were all but insuperable.
Deep in thought, yet still seeking help, he kept looking at K., and his
eyes blinked restlessly. He could say nothing to his mother before his
father went out, or his father would learn of it and then it would have
been all in vain, so he could mention it only later, but not suddenly
and abruptly, out of consideration for his mother, but slowly and at
a suitable opportunity. Only then must he ask his mother to agree,
only then could he come to fetch K., but wouldn’t that be too late,
wouldn’t the threat of his father’s return be looming already? Yes, it
was impossible after all. K., on the other hand, showed him that it
was not impossible. There was no need to fear there wouldn’t be
enough time; a short conversation, a brief encounter, would be
enough, and Hans wouldn’t have to come to fetch K., because K.

would be waiting concealed somewhere near the house, and once
Hans gave him a signal he would come at once. Oh no, said Hans, K.
mustn’t wait near the house—once again he was anxious about his
mother’s sensitivity—K. mustn’t set out without his mother’s
knowledge, Hans couldn’t enter into a secret agreement with K.
unknown to his mother, he would have to fetch K. from the school,
and not before his mother knew about it and had given permission.
Very well, said K., in that case it really was risky; it could be that
Hans’s father would ﬁnd him in the family house, and even if he
didn’t, Hans’s mother wouldn’t let K. come at all for fear that he
would, so everything would fail because of the boy’s father. But Hans
denied that again, and so the argument went back and forth. Long
before this K. had told Hans to leave the bench and come up to the
teacher’s desk, where he held him between his knees, caressing him
soothingly from time to time. This physical closeness meant that, in
spite of the occasional reluctance shown by Hans, they did come to
an understanding. Finally they agreed on the following plan: ﬁrst
Hans would tell his mother the whole truth, but adding, to make it
easier for her to agree, that K. also wanted to speak to Brunswick
himself—not about her, though, but on some other business. This
was true too, for in the course of the conversation K. had recollected
that, however dangerous and unpleasant Brunswick might be in
other respects, he really couldn’t be his, K.’s, enemy, for Brunswick,
at least according to the village mayor, had been the leader of those
who had wanted to have a land surveyor appointed, even if for
political reasons of their own. So K.’s arrival in the village must be
welcome to Brunswick, although it was true that in that case his surly
greeting to K. on the ﬁrst day, and the dislike of which Hans spoke,
were hard to understand. But perhaps Brunswick’s feelings had been
hurt because K. had not turned to him for help in the ﬁrst place, or
perhaps there was some other misunderstanding that could be
cleared up in a few words. And once that was done, K. could get
Brunswick’s support against the teacher, indeed even against the village mayor, and the entire oﬃcial deception—for what else was
it?—through which the village mayor and the teacher were keeping
him from the castle authorities and forcing him to take the job of
school janitor could be revealed. If it came to a quarrel over K. between
Brunswick and the village mayor, then Brunswick would have to get
K. on his side, K. would be received as a guest in Brunswick’s house,

Brunswick’s powers would be at his disposal in deﬁance of the village
mayor, and who knew where all that might get him? And he would
often be near the woman anyway—so he played with his dreams, and
they with him, while Hans, thinking entirely of his mother, observed
K.’s silence with concern, as you observe a doctor lost in thought
trying to ﬁnd a way to treat a severely ill patient. Hans agreed to K.’s
suggestion of saying that he wanted to speak to Brunswick about the
post of land surveyor, although only because that would protect his
mother from his father, and anyway it was just an emergency measure that he hoped wouldn’t have to be adopted. He merely asked how
K. would explain the late hour of his visit to his father, and ﬁnally
was satisﬁed to hear, although he did look a little gloomy, that K.
would say his intolerable position as school janitor, and the teacher’s
humiliating treatment of him, had driven all else out of his mind in
a sudden ﬁt of despair.
When they had anticipated all contingencies like this, as far as
anyone could tell, and the possibility of success at least needn’t be
entirely ruled out any longer, Hans became more cheerful, freed of
the burden of thought, and he chattered away in childish fashion for
a little longer, ﬁrst with K. and then with Frieda, who had been sitting there for some time with her mind on very diﬀerent subjects,
and who only now began to join in the conversation again. Among
other things, she asked Hans what he wanted to be when he grew up.
He didn’t have to think about that for long, but said he wanted to be
a man like K. When asked his reasons he wasn’t able to give any, and
when asked whether he really wanted to be a school janitor he ﬁrmly
said no. Only further questions elicited the workings of his mind in
expressing such a wish. K.’s present situation was by no means enviable, but dismal and humiliating, Hans himself saw that clearly, and
he didn’t need to observe other people to see it; he himself would
have liked to keep his mother right away from the sight of K. and
from anything he said. All the same, he had come to K. asking for
help, and was glad when K. agreed to give it, he thought he had seen
that other people felt the same, and above all his mother herself had
mentioned K. These opposing ideas led to his belief that K. might be
in a low, humiliating position at the moment, but in an admittedly
almost unimaginably distant future he would still triumph over
everyone. And that future, foolish as the idea might be, and K.’s proud
rise in it looked alluring to Hans. At that price, he was even ready to

accept K. as he now was. The particularly childish and precocious
nature of his wish lay in the fact that Hans looked down on K. as if
he were a younger boy, with a longer future ahead of him than his
own, a small boy’s future. It was with almost mournful gravity that,
under pressure from Frieda, he spoke of these things. But K. cheered
him up again by saying he knew what Hans envied him for—his
handsome gnarled walking-stick, which was lying on the table, and
with which Hans had been absent-mindedly playing as they talked.
Well, said K., he knew how to make such walking-sticks, and if their
plan succeeded he would make Hans an even better one. Hans was so
pleased by K.’s promise that it wasn’t quite clear whether he might
not indeed have had the walking-stick in mind all the time, and he
said a cheerful goodbye, not without pressing K.’s hand ﬁrmly and
saying: ‘So, I’ll see you the day after tomorrow.’

14
Frieda’s Grievance
Hans had left none too soon, for next moment the teacher opened
the door and cried, on seeing K. and Frieda sitting quietly at the
table: ‘Oh, pray forgive me for disturbing you! But can you tell me
when you are ﬁnally going to tidy this place up? We’re having to sit
all cooped up together over there, and lessons are suﬀering from it,
while you lounge around in the big gymnasium, and you’ve sent the
assistants away so as to have even more room for yourselves. So
kindly stand up and get moving!’ And he added, to K. alone: ‘And
you, fellow, go and fetch me my buﬀet lunch from the Bridge Inn!’
All this was said furiously, at the top of his voice, but the words were
relatively inoﬀensive, even the disrespectful address of K. as ‘fellow’.
K. was ready to do as he was told at once, and it was only to sound
the teacher out that he said: ‘But I’ve been dismissed.’ ‘Dismissed or
not, fetch me my lunch,’ said the teacher. ‘Dismissed or not is what
I want to know,’ said K. ‘What are you going on about?’ said the
teacher. ‘You didn’t accept the dismissal.’ ‘So is that enough to cancel
it out?’ asked K. ‘Not as far as I’m concerned, believe me,’ said the
teacher. ‘But extraordinarily enough, the village mayor won’t hear of
it. So get moving, or you really will be thrown out.’ K. was pleased;
so in the interim the teacher had spoken to the village mayor, or
perhaps not spoken to him but simply worked out what he expected
the village mayor’s opinion would be, and it was to K.’s advantage.
Now K. started straight oﬀ to fetch the buﬀet lunch, but the teacher
called him back again from the corridor, whether because he had just
wanted to test K.’s willingness to be of service with this special order,
so that he could add more directions to it, or because he felt like
giving orders and it pleased him to see K. running busily back and
forth like a waiter at his behest. For his part, K. knew that if he gave
way too far he would become the teacher’s slave and scapegoat, but
he would put up with the man’s whims within limits, for if the
teacher, as it transpired, could not legitimately dismiss him, he could
certainly make his job unpleasant to the point of being intolerable.
And now K. was much more anxious to keep the job than before.

His conversation with Hans had given him new hope—admittedly
improbable hope, and for no good reason at all, but hope not to be
forgotten all the same. It almost put even Barnabas out of his mind.
If he acted in accordance with it, and he had no alternative, then he
must do everything in his power to think of nothing else, not food
and lodging, not the village authorities, not even Frieda—and at bottom this was all about Frieda, for everything else concerned him only
in relation to her. So he had to try to keep this job, which gave Frieda
some security, and with his eye ﬁxed on that purpose he must not
shrink from enduring more from the teacher than he could otherwise
have brought himself to do. All this was not too painful; it was to be
classed with the constant little pinpricks of life, it was nothing by
comparison with what K. was striving for, and he had not come here
to lead a life of peace in high esteem.
And so, while he had been ready to run straight oﬀ to the inn, he
was also prepared to obey the new order to tidy up the room ﬁrst, so
that Miss Gisa could move back with her class. But it had to be done
very fast, for after that K. was to fetch the lunch anyway, and the
teacher said he was very hungry and thirsty. K. assured him that he
would do just as he wanted. The teacher watched for a little while as
K. made haste to clear away the bedding, put the gymnastic apparatus back in its proper place, and sweep up in haste, while Frieda
washed and scoured the podium. All this industry seemed to satisfy
the teacher. He pointed out that there was a heap of ﬁrewood for the
stove outside the door—he wasn’t going to let K. have access to the
woodshed any more—and then he went away, threatening to be back
soon and look in on the children.
After some time spent working in silence, Frieda asked why K.
was obeying the teacher so meekly now. She probably meant her
question to show sympathetic concern, but K., thinking how little
Frieda had succeeded in keeping her original promise to protect him
from the teacher’s orders and his violence, just said brieﬂy that now
he was a school janitor he must ﬁll the post well. Then they were
quiet again, until those few words reminded K. that Frieda had been
deep in anxious thought for a long time, indeed through almost his
entire conversation with Hans, and now, as he was carrying in
ﬁrewood, he asked straight out what was on her mind. She replied,
slowly looking up at him, that it was nothing in particular. She was
just thinking of the landlady and how true much of what she said was.

Only when K. pressed her further did she reply at greater length,
and after several refusals, but without stopping her work, which she
was doing not out of zeal, since she was really getting nowhere with
it, but only so as not to be forced to look at K. And now she told him
how she had listened calmly to his conversation with Hans at ﬁrst,
but then, startled by some of the things K. said, she had begun to
listen more closely, and from that point on had been unable to stop
hearing in it conﬁrmation of a warning that the landlady had given
her, although she had never wanted to believe it. K., angered by all
these generalities, more irritated than moved even by Frieda’s tearful
voice—and above all because here came the landlady meddling in his
life again, at least in his mind, since she hadn’t yet had much success
in person—dropped the wood he was carrying in his arms on the
ﬂoor, sat down on it, and speaking seriously, insisted on a full explanation. ‘Well,’ began Frieda, ‘the landlady often tried to make me
doubt you, right from the start, she didn’t say you were lying, on the
contrary, she said you were childishly honest, but your nature was so
diﬀerent from ours that even when you speak frankly we can hardly
bring ourselves to believe you, and without a good friend like her to
come to our aid we could bring ourselves to believe it only through
bitter experience. It had been much the same even for her, she said,
despite her keen eye for human nature. But since that last conversation she had with you at the Bridge Inn—I’m only repeating what
she said—she had seen through you, you couldn’t deceive her any
more however hard you tried to conceal your intentions. “Not that
he really conceals anything,” she kept saying, and then she added:
“Do try listening to him properly at every opportunity, not just
superﬁcially, listen to what he’s actually saying.” That was all she
said, yet what I read into it was something like this: you’d chatted me
up—yes, that was the vulgar term she used—just because I happened to cross your path, you didn’t dislike me, and you wrongly
thought a barmaid was bound to fall for every guest who put his hand
out to her. In addition, as the landlady learned from the landlord of
the Castle Inn, you wanted to spend the night there for some reason
or other, and whatever that reason was, I was the only way you could
achieve that aim. All of this would have been enough for you to make
love to me that night in the hope that more would come of it, and that
more was Klamm. The landlady doesn’t claim to know what you
want from Klamm, she says only that you were as anxious to meet

Klamm before you knew me as you were later. The only diﬀerence
was that earlier you had no hope of an interview, but now you thought
you could use me as a sure way of actually getting to see Klamm
quickly, even of having some advantage over him. How alarmed I
was—but at ﬁrst only momentarily, without any deeper reasons—when
you said today that before you knew me you had gone astray here.
Those might be the very words the landlady used; she also says that
only after you came to know me were you sure of your purpose. That
comes of your believing that, in me, you had made a conquest of one
of Klamm’s lovers, a pledge to be redeemed at the highest price. And
she said your sole aim was to negotiate with Klamm over that price.
As you thought nothing of me, only of the price, you were ready to
make any concessions as far as I was concerned, except over the
price. That’s why you don’t mind my losing my place at the Castle
Inn, you don’t mind my having to leave the Bridge Inn too, you don’t
mind my having to do the hard work of a school janitor here, you
have no tenderness and not even any time left for me. You leave me
to the assistants, you’re not jealous, I am valuable only to you because
I was Klamm’s lover, in your ignorance you try not to let me forget
Klamm so that in the end I won’t ﬁght back too hard when the crucial moment comes, yet you are also at odds with the landlady, the
only person who, you think, could tear me from you, so you quarrel
with her in order to be made to leave the Bridge Inn with me; for you
never doubt that, so far as it is up to me, I shall be your chattel come
what may. You imagine that an interview with Klamm is a matter of
doing a deal, cash down for cash down. You reckon on all possibilities; just so long as you get the price you want you’re ready to do
anything; if Klamm wants me, you will give me to him; if he wants
you to stay with me, you will stay with me; if he wants you to reject
me you’ll reject me, but you’re ready for pretence too if it’s to your
advantage, you will pretend to love me, you will try to counter his
indiﬀerence by emphasizing your own low worth, shaming him by
the fact that you are his successor, or by telling him of my confessions of love for him, which I really did make, and asking him to take
me back again, after paying the price, of course; and if there is nothing else for it, then you will simply beg in the name of Mr and
Mrs K. But, the landlady concluded, if you then see that you have
been wrong in every way, in your assumptions and in your hopes, in
your idea of Klamm and his relationship with me, then my torments

will really begin, for then more than ever I will be all you have, something on which you rely although at the same time it has proved
worthless, and you will treat me accordingly, since you have no
feeling for me but a sense of ownership.’
K. had listened intently, his mouth ﬁrmly closed. The wood under
him had started shifting so that he almost slipped and fell on the
ﬂoor, but he took no notice of that. Only now did he stand up, sit
down on the podium, take Frieda’s hand, which she feebly tried to
withdraw from his, and said: ‘I wasn’t always able to tell your own
opinion and the landlady’s apart in what you said.’ ‘It was only the
landlady’s opinion,’ said Frieda. ‘I listened to it all because I respect
the landlady, but it was the ﬁrst time in my life that I’d ever entirely
dismissed her opinion. Everything she said seemed to me so pitiful,
so far from any understanding of how matters really stood between
the two of us. In fact the truth seemed to be the complete opposite of
what she said. I thought of that gloomy morning after our ﬁrst night.
How you knelt beside me, with a look that seemed to say all was lost.
And then it really did turn out that, much as I tried, I didn’t help
you, I was a hindrance to you. Through me the landlady became
your enemy, a powerful enemy and one you still underestimate. It
was for my sake, because you have to provide for me, that you had to
ﬁght for your job, you were at a disadvantage with the village mayor,
you had to submit to the teacher, you were at the mercy of the assistants, and the worst of it is that for my sake you may even have oﬀended Klamm. The fact that you kept wanting to see Klamm was only a
useless attempt to be reconciled with him somehow. And I told
myself that the landlady, who must know all this much better than I
did, was only trying to keep me from reproaching myself too much
with her whispered insinuations. It was well-meant but unnecessary
trouble. My love for you would have helped me to get over anything,
it would ﬁnally have buoyed you up too, if not here in the village then
somewhere else, it had already given proof of its power in saving you
from Barnabas and his family.’ ‘So that was your opinion at the time,’
said K. ‘And what has changed since then?’ ‘I don’t know,’ said
Frieda, looking at K.’s hand holding her own. ‘Perhaps nothing has
changed; when you are so close to me, and you ask so calmly, I think
nothing has changed. But in reality,’ she added, withdrawing her
hand, sitting up straight opposite him, and shedding tears openly,
holding her tear-stained face up to him as if she were not crying over

herself and so had nothing to hide, as if she were in tears over K.’s
betrayal and the misery of the sight was meant for him, ‘in reality
everything changed when I heard you talking to that boy. How innocently you began, asking about his life at home, about this, that, and
the other, I felt as if you were just coming into the bar, so trusting,
so open-hearted, seeking to meet my eyes in such a childlike, eager
way. There was no diﬀerence between then and now, I only wished
the landlady were here listening to you, and I tried to stick to that
opinion. But then suddenly, I don’t know just how, I noticed why
you were talking to the boy like that. Your words of sympathy won
his trust, which is not easily given, so that you could make straight
for your goal, which I saw more and more clearly. Your goal was that
woman. Your apparent concern for her now openly showed that you
were thinking only of your own aﬀairs. You are betraying the woman
before you’ve even won her. I heard not only my past but my future
in your words, it was as if the landlady were sitting beside me
explaining it all, and I was trying to argue against her with all my
might, but clearly seeing the hopelessness of any such thing, and
yet it was not really I who was being deceived now, it was the other
woman. And when I pulled myself together and asked Hans what
he wanted to be, and he said a man like you, he was so utterly devoted
to you, oh, what a diﬀerence was there between him now, that good
boy whose trust you have abused so badly, and me then in the bar of
the inn?’
‘Everything you say,’ said K., who had managed to pull himself
together as he grew used to her reproachful tone, ‘everything you say
has something in it, it is not untrue, only hostile. Those are the
thoughts of the landlady, my enemy, even if you believe they are
your own, and that’s a comfort to me. But they are instructive;
there’s a lot to be learnt from the landlady. She didn’t say all this to
me herself, although she hasn’t spared me otherwise; obviously she
handed you this weapon hoping that you would use it at a particularly bad or crucial time for me. If I am abusing your trust, then so is
she. But now, think, Frieda: even if it were all exactly as the landlady
says, it would be very bad only in one event, which is to say if you
don’t love me. Then and only then would I really have won your
heart by calculation and cunning for the sake of advantage. Perhaps
it would even have been part of my plan to make you feel sorry for
me, and that was why I appeared in front of you arm in arm with

Olga, and the landlady has simply forgotten to add that to the list of
my misdeeds. But if that’s not the case, and no cunning beast of prey
snatched you away, but instead you came to me as I went to you and
we found each other, forgetting ourselves, tell me, Frieda, then
what? Then I am backing your cause as well as mine, there’s no
diﬀerence, and only an enemy like the landlady can separate the two.
That’s true in general, and it also applies to Hans. And in judging my
conversation with Hans your tender feelings lead you to exaggerate
wildly, for if what Hans and I want is not entirely the same, no actual
conﬂict of interests is involved, and what’s more, our own diﬀerence
of opinion was no secret from Hans. If you think so, then you underestimate that cautious little fellow, and even if he didn’t notice anything, I hope no harm would come to anyone because of that.’
‘It’s so diﬃcult to know what to think, K.,’ said Frieda, sighing. ‘I
certainly didn’t feel any distrust of you, and if I caught something of
the kind from the landlady I will gladly dismiss it and beg you on my
knees to forgive me, which is really what I am doing constantly, even
if I say nasty things. But it is still true that you’ve kept a good deal
secret from me. You come and go, and I don’t know where to and
where from. When Hans knocked on the door you even called out the
name of Barnabas. If only you had ever just once uttered my name as
lovingly, as for some reason I don’t understand you uttered that
hated name! If you don’t trust me, how can I feel no distrust myself ?
And then I’m left to the landlady, and your conduct seems to conﬁrm
what she says. Not in everything, I don’t claim that it conﬁrms her
opinion in everything, for didn’t you chase the assistants away for my
sake? Oh, if only you knew how hard I try to ﬁnd a kernel of good for
myself in all you do and say, even if it torments me.’ ‘Remember
above all, Frieda,’ said K., ‘that I am not hiding the least little thing
from you. But how the landlady hates me, doing all she can to part
you from me, and what contemptible means she uses, and you give
way to her, Frieda, how you give way to her! Tell me, in exactly what
respect am I hiding something from you? You know that I want an
interview with Klamm, you also know that you can’t help me to get
one, so I must try by myself, and you can see that so far I haven’t
succeeded. I make useless attempts, which humiliate me quite
enough as it is, and am I to humiliate myself twice over by telling you
about them? Am I to boast of having waited in vain and freezing all
through a long afternoon at the door of Klamm’s sleigh? Happy to

dismiss such thoughts at last, I hurry to you, and now I hear all these
accusations of yours. What about Barnabas? Yes, I am certainly
expecting him. He is Klamm’s messenger, but that wasn’t my doing.’
‘Barnabas again,’ cried Frieda. ‘I can’t believe he is a good messenger.’ ‘You may be right,’ said K., ‘but he’s the only messenger who’s
been sent to me.’ ‘That makes it all the worse,’ said Frieda. ‘You
should beware of him all the more.’ ‘I’m afraid he has given me no
reason to beware of him yet,’ said K., smiling. ‘He seldom comes,
and what he brings is of no importance; only the fact that it comes
directly from Klamm gives it any value.’ ‘But look,’ said Frieda, ‘you
aren’t even making Klamm your business any more, and perhaps
that’s what worries me most. The way you were always wanting to go
and see Klamm, overriding me, was bad enough, but now you seem
to want to avoid Klamm, which is much worse, and something that
even the landlady didn’t foresee. According to the landlady my happiness, precarious yet very real as it was, ended on the day when you
ﬁnally saw that your hopes of Klamm were in vain. But now you
aren’t even waiting for such a day any more; all of a sudden a little
boy comes along, and you begin quarrelling with him over his
mother as if you were ﬁghting for the very air you breathe.’ ‘You
have the right idea of my conversation with Hans,’ said K. ‘Yes,
that’s how it really was. But is all your earlier life really so remote
from you (except, of course, for the landlady, and there’s no getting
rid of her) that you no longer know how one must ﬁght to make any
progress, particularly when you start from so far below? How any
method oﬀering any kind of hope must be used? And this woman
comes from the castle, she told me so herself when I lost my way and
visited Lasemann’s house on my ﬁrst day here. What would be more
natural than to ask her for advice, or even aid? If the landlady knows
about all the obstacles keeping people from Klamm, then that woman
probably knows the way to ﬁnd him; after all, she came the same way
herself.’ ‘The way to Klamm?’ asked Frieda. ‘To Klamm, yes, of
course, where else?’ asked K. Then he jumped up. ‘But now it’s high
time I went to fetch that buﬀet lunch.’ Frieda earnestly begged him
to stay, pleading far harder than the situation required, as if only his
staying would prove all the consoling things he had said to her. But
K. remembered the teacher, pointed to the door that might be ﬂung
open at any moment with a crash like thunder, and promised to come
back quickly, saying she wouldn’t even have to heat the stove, he

would do it himself. And ﬁnally, in silence, Frieda agreed. As K.
trudged through the snow outside—the path ought to have been
shovelled clear a long time ago; it was strange how slowly all this
work went—he saw one of the assistants still clinging to the barred
fence, worn out. Only one; where was the other? Had K. at least
broken the spirit of one of them? The remaining assistant was certainly still eager to carry on as before, you could see that when, enlivened by the sight of K., he immediately began stretching out his
arms and rolling his eyes imploringly. I must say, K. told himself,
he’s a model of intransigence, but immediately he couldn’t help
adding: it could freeze him to that fence. However, outwardly K. had
nothing to oﬀer the assistant but a threat, shaking his ﬁst in a manner
calculated to deter him from any approach, and indeed the assistant
anxiously moved some way backwards. Frieda was just opening a
window to air the room before the stove was lit, as she and K. had
agreed. At that the assistant left K. alone and stole up to the window,
irresistibly drawn to it. Her expression one of mingled kind feelings
for the assistant and helpless pleading when she looked at K., she
waved her hand slightly out of the window. It wasn’t even clear
whether that was to fend the assistant oﬀ or to welcome him, but it
didn’t keep him from coming closer. Then Frieda quickly opened
the outer window, but stayed behind it, her hand on the latch, her
head on one side, her eyes wide, and a ﬁxed smile on her lips. Did
she know that she was enticing rather than deterring the assistant?
But K. did not look back any more; he wanted to hurry as fast as
possible and be back again soon.

15
At Amalia’s House
At last—it was already dark, late in the afternoon—K. had cleared
the garden path, piling up the snow and beating it down ﬁrmly on
both sides of the path, and now he had ﬁnished his day’s work. He
stood at the garden gate, with no one else in sight. He had sent the
assistant oﬀ hours ago, chasing after him for quite a long way, and
then the assistant had gone to hide somewhere among the little gardens and huts, couldn’t be seen, and had not emerged since. Frieda
was at home, either doing their laundry or still busy bathing Gisa’s
cat; it was a sign of great conﬁdence on Gisa’s part to give Frieda the
job of bathing the cat, unpleasant and unsuitable for her as it was,
and K. would certainly not have allowed it had it not been advisable,
considering his various derelictions of duty, to seize every opportunity of getting into Gisa’s good graces. Gisa had watched with pleasure as K. brought down the small child’s bathtub from the attic,
water was heated, and ﬁnally the cat was picked up and carefully
placed in the tub. Then Gisa had left the cat entirely to Frieda, for
Schwarzer, K.’s acquaintance of that ﬁrst evening, had arrived,
greeted K. with a mixture of timidity—for which the foundations
had been laid that evening—and the boundless disdain due to a
school janitor, and then went into the other schoolroom with Gisa.
K. had been told at the Bridge Inn that Schwarzer, although he was
the son of one of the castle wardens, had been living in the village for
a long time for love of Gisa, and through his connections had got the
parish council to appoint him an assistant teacher, although his work
in that capacity was mainly conﬁned to missing hardly any of the
lessons given by Gisa herself, sitting either on the school bench with
the children, or for preference at Gisa’s feet on the podium. By now
he was not in the way; the children had long ago become used to him,
perhaps more easily because Schwarzer neither liked nor understood
children and hardly spoke to them. All he had done was to take over
the gymnastics lessons from Gisa, and for the rest he was happy to
be near her, to live in the air that Gisa breathed and the warmth
of her presence.* His greatest pleasure was to sit beside Gisa and

correct the pupils’ exercise books with her. They were busy with that
today. Schwarzer had brought a large stack of exercise books with
him, the teacher gave them his too, and as long as there was still light
K. could see the pair of them sitting at a little table by the window,
their heads together, never moving. Now all you could see there was
the ﬂickering light of two candles. It was a grave and silent love that
united the couple. The tone was set by Gisa, whose lethargic nature
would nonetheless sometimes break out into wild excess, but who
would never have tolerated such conduct in other people at other
times, and so the lively Schwarzer had to adapt to her, walk slowly,
speak slowly, keep silent a great deal. However, anyone could see
that he was richly rewarded for all this by Gisa’s mere silent presence. Yet perhaps Gisa did not really love him at all, at least her
round, grey eyes, which almost never blinked, although their pupils
seemed to roll, gave no answer to such questions. You saw that she
tolerated Schwarzer, but she certainly did not understand what an
honour it was to be loved by the son of one of the castle wardens, and
she carried her full and sensuous body in the same way whether
Schwarzer’s eyes were following her or not. Schwarzer, for his part,
made constant sacriﬁces for her by staying in the village; when messengers came from his father to fetch him back, as they often did, he
dispatched them with as much indignation as if being brieﬂy
reminded by them of the castle and his duty as a son was a harsh and
irremediable disruption of his happiness. However, he really had
plenty of spare time, for in general Gisa would keep him company
only during lessons and while they were correcting exercises, not
in any spirit of calculation but because she liked her comfort, and
therefore being alone, more than anything, and was probably happiest when she could stretch out on the sofa at home at complete
liberty beside her cat, who never bothered her at all, since it could
hardly even move any more. So Schwarzer drifted around with nothing to do for a large part of the day, but he enjoyed that too, for it
always gave him the chance, a chance which he often seized, to go to
Lion Alley where Gisa lived, climb up to her little attic room, listen
at the door, which was always locked, and then go away again after
hearing nothing inside the room but the most complete and strange
silence. The consequences of this way of life did show in him sometimes, but never in Gisa’s presence, only in ridiculous outbursts at
moments when he once more felt wounded in his oﬃcial pride,

which to be sure did not suit his present situation. When such incidents occurred they usually turned out rather badly, as K. had discovered for himself.
The only surprising thing was that Schwarzer was spoken of with
a certain respect, at least at the Bridge Inn, even in matters that
hardly merited it but were rather ridiculous, and the respect felt for
him extended to Gisa. All the same, it was not right for Schwarzer,
as an assistant teacher, to feel so vastly superior to K. No such superiority in fact existed; a school janitor is someone of great importance
to the teaching staﬀ of a school, certainly to a teacher of Schwarzer’s
kind; he may not be disdained with impunity, and if such disdain is
felt, if someone feels he must show it for reasons of his own status,
something suitable should at least be done in recompense. K. liked to
think of that now and then, and Schwarzer was still in his debt from
that ﬁrst evening. The debt had not been diminished by the fact that
the next few days had shown Schwarzer’s reception of him to be correct, for that reception, it must not be forgotten, might have determined the course of all that followed it. Because of Schwarzer, the
full attention of the authorities had, nonsensically enough, been
drawn to K. that very ﬁrst hour, when he was still a total stranger in
the village, knowing no one, with nowhere to go, worn out by his
long journey on foot, helpless as he lay there on the straw mattress,
at the mercy of every attack from the authorities on high. Only a
night later it might all have gone diﬀerently, smoothly, and in some
privacy. At least no one would have known anything about him,
would have had no suspicion, would at least not have hesitated to let
him spend a day with them as a travelling craftsman. They would
have seen how useful and reliable he was, word of it would have gone
around the neighbourhood, he would probably soon have found a
job as a manservant somewhere. Of course he would not have challenged the authorities. But there was a great diﬀerence between calling Central Oﬃce or someone else to the telephone in the middle of
the night on his account, asking an oﬃcial in Central Oﬃce to
make an instant decision, and moreover asking him to do this with
apparent humility but irritating persistence, especially when the
person doing the asking was Schwarzer, who was probably not
popular up there, and going to knock on the village mayor’s door
next day instead. K. could have gone there during working hours,
could have said, as the situation required, that he was a stranger here,

a travelling journeyman who had found a bed for the night with a
certain resident of the parish, and was probably going on in the
morning unless he found work here, improbable as that might be,
work for only a few days, naturally, on no account would he stay any
longer. That, or something like it, was how matters would have gone
but for Schwarzer. The authorities would have looked into his case
all the same, but at leisure, in the line of business, undisturbed by the
impatience of the party pressing them for answers, whom they probably particularly disliked. Well, K. was not to blame for any of this,
it was Schwarzer’s fault, but Schwarzer was the son of a castle warden, and to outward appearance had behaved perfectly correctly, so
it could only be chalked up against K. And what was the ludicrous
reason for the whole thing? Perhaps a little spurt of temper on Gisa’s
part that day, which had left Schwarzer wandering around at night
suﬀering from insomnia, and taking his annoyance out on K. Looking
at it from the other side, of course, you could say that K. owed a good
deal to Schwarzer’s conduct. That alone had made something possible that K. would never have done on his own, would never have
dared to try on his own, and for their part the authorities would
hardly have allowed it: from the ﬁrst he had come face to face with
those authorities, so far as that was possible, openly and without
equivocation. But that was a poor sort of compensation; it might
spare K. a good deal of lying and secretiveness, but it also left him
almost defenceless, or at least put him at a disadvantage in his struggle, and could have cast him into despair had he not felt obliged to
remember the disproportionate balance of power between the
authorities and himself. All the lies and cunning of which he might
be capable could not have done much against that disproportion, but
must have been only a relatively minor factor. However, this was
only an idea entertained by K. to console himself. Schwarzer was still
indebted to him, all the same, and if he had done K. harm at ﬁrst,
perhaps he could help now, for K. was going to need help in future
in the slightest things, in his basic prerequisites, and Barnabas
seemed to have failed him once more. For Frieda’s sake K. had
hesitated all day to go to Barnabas’s home, to avoid having to receive
him in front of Frieda he had worked out of doors, and after the work
was done had stayed outside waiting for Barnabas, but Barnabas did
not come. Now there was nothing for it but to visit the sisters, just
for a little while; he would simply stand in the doorway to ask his

question, and he’d soon be back. So he rammed the shovel into the
snow and went oﬀ. He arrived at the Barnabas family’s house out of
breath, knocked brieﬂy, ﬂung the door open, and asked, paying no
attention to what the room looked like: ‘Hasn’t Barnabas come in
yet?’ Only now did he notice that Olga wasn’t there, that once again
the two old people were drowsing at the table, which was a long way
from K.—they still hadn’t taken in the fact of his arrival at the door,
and turned their faces to look his way only slowly—and ﬁnally that
Amalia was lying under some rugs on the bench beside the stove, and
in her ﬁrst fright at K.’s appearance had started up and was holding
her hand to her forehead to recover herself. If Olga had been here,
then she would have replied at once, and K. would have been able to
leave again, but as it was he had to take at least the few steps that
would bring him to Amalia. He oﬀered her his hand, which she
pressed in silence, and asked her to keep her alarmed parents from
wandering oﬀ, which she did with a few words. K. learned that Olga
was out in the yard chopping wood, the exhausted Amalia—she did
not say why she was exhausted—had had to lie down just now, and
no, Barnabas was not home yet, but he was sure to come in very soon,
for he never stayed at the castle overnight. K. thanked her for the
information. Now he was free to go again, but Amalia asked if he
wouldn’t like to wait for Olga. He was sorry, he said, he had no time
just now. Then Amalia asked if he had already spoken to Olga that
day. Surprised, he answered in the negative, and asked whether there
was anything in particular that Olga wanted to tell him. Amalia
curled her lip as if mildly annoyed, nodded silently to K., clearly in
farewell, and lay down again. From her reclining position she scrutinized him as if surprised to see that he was still there. Her gaze was
cold, clear, ﬁxed as ever, and was not precisely directed at what she
was observing, instead passing by it almost imperceptibly, but without any doubt, which was disturbing. It did not seem to be due to
weakness, or embarrassment, or dishonesty, but to a constant desire
for privacy which dominated every other feeling, and perhaps she
herself became aware of it only in this way. K. thought he remembered that this look of hers had occupied his mind on that ﬁrst
evening, indeed probably the entire unattractive impression the family had immediately made on him derived from it. In itself her
expression was not ugly, but proud, and showed genuine reserve.
‘You are always so sad, Amalia,’ said K. ‘Is something troubling you?

Can’t you tell me? I’ve never seen a country girl like you before. Only
today, only now, has that really occurred to me. Do you come from
this village? Were you born here?’ Amalia said yes, as if K. had asked
only the last question, and then added: ‘So you will wait for Olga,
then?’ ‘I don’t know why you keep asking the same thing,’ said K. ‘I
can’t stay any longer because my ﬁancée expects me home.’ Amalia
propped herself on her elbows; she said she didn’t know anything
about any ﬁancée. K. told her Frieda’s name. Amalia said she didn’t
know her. She asked if Olga knew about the engagement, and K. said
he thought so; after all, Olga had seen him with Frieda, and such
news spread quickly in the village. However, Amalia assured him
that Olga was unlikely to know about it, and it would make her very
unhappy, for she seemed to be in love with K. herself. She hadn’t
said anything about it openly, for she was very reserved, but she
involuntarily betrayed her love. K. was sure, he said, that Amalia was
wrong. Amalia smiled, and that smile, although a sad one, lit up her
sombre face, made her silence eloquent and her strangeness familiar.
It was like the telling of a secret, a hitherto closely guarded possession that could be taken back again, but never taken back entirely.
Amalia said she was sure she wasn’t wrong, why, she knew even
more, she knew that K. liked Olga too, and that his visits, on the
pretext of some message or another from Barnabas, were really to see
Olga. But now that Amalia knew all about it, he didn’t have to be so
strictly cautious and could come more often. That was all she’d
wanted to tell him, she added. K. shook his head and thought of his
engagement. Amalia didn’t seem to be giving that engagement much
thought; the immediate impression made on her by K., who after all
was standing in front of her alone, was what mattered to her. She
asked only when K. had met the girl Frieda; he had been in the village only a few days. K. told her about the evening at the Castle Inn,
to which Amalia said only, and brieﬂy, that she had been very much
against anyone’s taking him there. She called on Olga to vouch for
that, for her sister was just coming in with an armful of wood, fresh
and pink-cheeked from the cold air, lively and strong, as if her usual
heavy immobility indoors were transformed by the work outside.
She threw the wood down, greeted K. without embarrassment, and
immediately asked after Frieda. K. cast Amalia a meaning glance, but
she did not seem to think herself refuted yet. A little annoyed by
that, K. talked about Frieda at greater length than he would have

done otherwise, describing the diﬃcult circumstances in which she
was trying to keep house somehow or other in the school, and in the
haste of telling his tale—for he wanted to go straight home—he
forgot himself so far that, as he took his leave, he invited the sisters
to visit him some time. But now he did feel alarm and stopped, while
Amalia immediately said, without giving him time to say another
word, that she would accept the invitation, so now Olga had to say so
too, and she did. K., however, still harried by his feeling that he
ought to get away in a hurry, and uneasy under Amalia’s gaze, did
not hesitate to say bluntly that the invitation had been entirely
unconsidered, he had made it only out of personal inclination, but
unfortunately he would have to withdraw it, since there was such
hostility, although for his own part he didn’t know why, between
Frieda on the one hand and Barnabas and his family on the other.
‘Oh, it’s not hostility,’ said Amalia, getting up from the bench and
dropping the rug behind her, ‘it’s nothing that looms as large as that,
it’s just a case of going along with public opinion. Well, oﬀ you go to
your ﬁancée, I can see what a hurry you’re in. And never fear that we
shall come and see you. I said we would at ﬁrst only as a joke, out of
malice. But you can come and see us when you like, there’s no diﬃculty about that. You can always give Barnabas’s messages as an
excuse. I’ll make it still easier for you by saying that even if Barnabas
brings you a message from the castle, he can’t go to the school to see
you. He can’t run about like that, poor lad, he’s wearing himself out
in the service of the castle, you’ll have to come to fetch the message
yourself.’ K. had never heard Amalia make such a long speech, and
it did not sound like the usual way she spoke; there was a kind of
haughtiness in it felt not only by K. but also, obviously, by her sister
Olga, who knew her well. She stood a little to one side, hands held in
her lap, once again in her usual attitude, stooping slightly and with
legs apart. Her eyes were ﬁxed on Amalia, while Amalia looked only
at K. ‘This is all a mistake,’ said K. ‘You are much mistaken if you
think I’m not serious about waiting for Barnabas. Getting my aﬀairs
with the authorities into order is my dearest, indeed my only, wish.
And Barnabas is going to help me achieve it; much of my hope is
set on him. To be sure, he has disappointed me badly once, but that
was more my own fault than his. It happened in the confusion of my
ﬁrst hours here. I thought at the time I could get everything done
on a little evening walk, and then I bore him a grudge because the

impossible proved to be impossible indeed. That has inﬂuenced me
even in assessing your family and you yourselves, but that’s all over.
I think I know you better now. You are even—’ here K. looked for
the right word, did not ﬁnd it at once, and contented himself by saying something like what he meant: ‘You may well be more kindly
disposed than any of the other village people, as far as I yet know
them. But Amalia, you bewilder me again when you make so light, if
not of your brother’s job, then of his importance to me. Perhaps you
are not in the know about Barnabas’s aﬀairs. If so, very well, and I
will let the matter rest. But perhaps you are in the know—indeed,
that’s the impression I get—and then it’s bad, then it would mean
that your brother is deceiving me.’ ‘Never fear,’ said Amalia. ‘I am
not in the know, nothing could induce me to let anyone tell me about
his aﬀairs, nothing, not even consideration for you, and I would do a
good deal for you, for as you said we are kindly disposed people. But
my brother’s aﬀairs are his own, I know nothing about them except
what I hear now and then by chance and involuntarily. On the other
hand, Olga can tell you all about it, because she’s very close to him.’
And Amalia went away, ﬁrst to her parents, with whom she had a
whispered conversation, and then into the kitchen. She had left without taking her leave of K., as if she knew he would stay a good deal
longer, and goodbyes were not needed.

16
K. stayed behind, looking rather surprised; Olga laughed at him
and drew him over to the bench by the stove. She seemed to be really
happy to be able to sit here alone with him, but it was a peaceable
happiness, certainly untroubled by jealousy. And that very lack of
jealousy, and thus also of any severity, did K. good. He liked to look
into her blue eyes, which were not enticing nor dominating, but shy
as they rested on him and held his gaze. It was as if the warnings of
Frieda and the landlady had made him not more receptive to all this,
but more attentive and alert. And he laughed with Olga when she
wondered why he had called Amalia kindly disposed just now.
Amalia had all kinds of qualities, but kindness was not among them.
To that K. explained that naturally his praise had been intended for
her, Olga, but Amalia was so overbearing that she not only applied
everything said in her presence to herself, but made you apply it to
her of your own free will. ‘That’s true,’ said Olga, growing more
serious now. ‘Truer than you think. Amalia is younger than me,
younger than Barnabas too, but she’s the one who makes decisions in
the family, for good and for bad, and indeed she has more to bear
than any of us, good as well as bad.’ K. thought she was exaggerating,
for only just now Amalia had said that she didn’t concern herself
with her brother’s aﬀairs. However, Olga knew all about that. ‘How
am I to explain it?’ said Olga. ‘Amalia cares neither for Barnabas nor
for me, she really cares for no one but our parents, she tends them
day and night, she has just asked what they would like for supper and
has gone to the kitchen to cook for them, and has brought herself to
get up, although she has been feeling unwell since midday and was
lying on the bench here. But even if she doesn’t care for us we are
dependent on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to give us
advice on what to do we’d be certain to take it, but she doesn’t; we
are not close to her. You have a great deal of experience of human
nature, you come from outside this place, doesn’t she seem to you too
particularly clever?’ ‘She seems to me particularly unhappy,’ said K.,
‘but how does your respect for her ﬁt the fact that, for instance,
Barnabas carries messages, and Amalia disapproves of his job and

perhaps even despises it?’ ‘If he knew what else to do he would stop
carrying messages at once. It’s not a job that satisﬁes him at all.’ ‘Isn’t
he a trained shoemaker?’ asked K. ‘Yes, to be sure,’ said Olga. ‘He
does some work on the side for Brunswick, and could have work day
and night and earn good money if he wanted.’ ‘Well then,’ said K.,
‘he’d have something to do instead of working as a messenger.’
‘Instead of working as a messenger?’ said Olga, astonished. ‘Why, do
you think he does the job for what he can earn from it?’ ‘Maybe,’ said
K., ‘but you were just saying it didn’t satisfy him.’ ‘It doesn’t satisfy
him, for several diﬀerent reasons,’ said Olga, ‘but it is service to the
castle, after all, a kind of service to the castle, or at least that’s what
people are meant to think.’ ‘What?’ said K. ‘Are you all in doubt even
of that?’ ‘Well,’ said Olga, ‘not really. Barnabas goes to the oﬃces,
mingles with the servants as if he were one of them, even occasionally
sees an oﬃcial in the distance, he is regularly given important letters
to carry, why, even oral messages are entrusted to him to be delivered. That’s a great deal, and we can be proud of what he has already
achieved at such a young age.’ K. nodded. There was no thought of
going home in his mind now. ‘Does he have his own livery too?’ he
asked. ‘The jacket, you mean?’ said Olga. ‘No, Amalia made that for
him even before he was a messenger. But you are close to touching a
sore point. For a long time he’d have liked to have, well, not a livery,
because there is no such thing at the castle, but an oﬃcial suit, and
he was promised one too, but they are very dilatory about such things
at the castle, and the worst of it is that you never know what the delay
means. It could mean that the matter is going through oﬃcial channels, but then again it could mean that the oﬃcial process hasn’t even
begun, that—for instance—they want to test Barnabas more ﬁrst.
And ﬁnally, it could also mean that the case has already been through
oﬃcial channels, and Barnabas will never get that suit. Nothing can
be discovered in more detail, or only after a long time. We have a
saying here—maybe you know it—“Oﬃcial decisions are as elusive
as young girls.” ’ ‘That’s a good observation,’ said K., and he took it
even more seriously than Olga. ‘A good observation, and such decisions may share certain other characteristics with young girls.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Olga, ‘though I really don’t know what you mean.
Maybe you mean it as a compliment. However, as to the oﬃcial
suit, that’s only one of Barnabas’s worries, and as we all share our
worries it’s one of mine too. We ask ourselves in vain: why doesn’t

he get an oﬃcial suit? But then none of this is simple. The oﬃcials,
for instance, don’t seem to wear oﬃcial dress; as far as we know here,
and from what Barnabas tells us, no, the oﬃcials go about in ordinary
clothing, although it is very elegant. And you’ve seen Klamm. But of
course Barnabas is not an oﬃcial, even an oﬃcial of the lowest rank,
and does not presume to be one. However, even upper servants, not
that we get to see those here in the village, have no oﬃcial dress,
according to Barnabas, which you might think on the face of it is
some comfort, but a deceptive one, for is Barnabas an upper servant?
No, however fond I may be of him I can’t say that, he is not an upper
servant, and the mere fact that he comes into the village and even
lives here proves it; the upper servants are even more reserved than
the oﬃcials, perhaps rightly so, perhaps in fact they rank higher than
many of the oﬃcials, and there’s something to be said for that view,
for they do less work. According to Barnabas it is a wonderful sight
to see those remarkably tall, strong men slowly walking down the
corridor. Barnabas always steals carefully around them. In short,
there can be no question of Barnabas’s being an upper servant. So he
could be one of the lower servants, but they do have oﬃcial suits, at
least when they come down into the village, not exactly livery, for
there are many diﬀerences between them, but anyway, you can
always tell the servants from the castle at once by their clothes.
You’ve seen such men at the Castle Inn. The most striking thing
about those clothes is that they are generally close-ﬁtting. No farmer
or craftsman could wear clothing like that. Well, Barnabas doesn’t
have such a suit, which is not just slightly shameful or humiliating,
that could be borne, but it makes us doubt everything—especially
when we feel depressed, and sometimes, in fact quite often, Barnabas
and I do feel depressed. Then we wonder: is what Barnabas does
service to the castle? He certainly goes into the oﬃces, but are the
oﬃces really the castle? And even if the castle does have oﬃces, are
they the oﬃces which Barnabas is allowed to enter? He goes into
oﬃces, yes, but that’s only a part of the whole, for there are barriers,
and yet more oﬃces beyond them. He is not exactly forbidden to go
any further, but he can’t go any further once he has found his superiors, and when they have dealt with him they send him away.
What’s more, you are always being watched there, or at least you
think you are. And even if he did go further, what good would that
do if he had no oﬃcial work there and was an intruder? You mustn’t

imagine those barriers as distinct dividing-lines; Barnabas always
impresses that upon me. There are barriers in the oﬃces that he does
enter too; there are barriers that he passes, and they look no diﬀerent
from those that he has never crossed, so it can’t be assumed from the
outset that beyond those last barriers there are oﬃces of an essentially diﬀerent kind from those into which Barnabas has been. We
think so only at those times of depression. And then the doubts continue, there’s no dismissing them. Barnabas speaks to oﬃcials,
Barnabas is given messages. But what kind of oﬃcials, what kind of
messages are they? Now, he says, he has been assigned to Klamm,
and Klamm in person gives him work to do. Well, that would be a
great achievement, even upper servants do not get so far, in fact it
would be almost too much, and that’s cause for concern. Just think
of being assigned to Klamm, speaking to him face to face! But is it
really all it seems? Well, yes, it is, but then why does Barnabas doubt
that the oﬃcial who is described there as Klamm really is Klamm?’
‘Olga,’ said K., ‘are you joking? How can there be any doubt of
Klamm’s appearance? It’s well known what he looks like; I have seen
him myself.’ ‘Oh, I’m certainly not joking, K.,’ said Olga. ‘Those are
not jokes, they are my gravest anxieties. But I’m not telling you this
to relieve my heart and perhaps burden yours, I am telling you
because you were asking about Barnabas, Amalia told me to tell you,
and I too think it will be useful for you to know more. I am also doing
it for the sake of Barnabas, so that you won’t hope for too much from
him, so that he won’t disappoint you, when he himself would suﬀer
from your disappointment. He is very sensitive; for instance, he
didn’t sleep last night because you were displeased with him yesterday evening, and it seems you said that it was very hard on you to
have “only such a messenger” as Barnabas. Those words kept him
awake, although I don’t suppose that you personally noticed it much,
for messengers have to be in control of themselves. But he doesn’t
have an easy time, not even with you. As you see it, I’m sure you
don’t think you are asking too much of him; you have certain ideas
of a messenger’s work in your head, and you judge your own
demands by those ideas. But at the castle they have other ideas of a
messenger’s job, ideas that can’t be reconciled with yours, even if
Barnabas were to sacriﬁce himself entirely to his work, which I’m
afraid he sometimes does seem inclined to do. We’d have to go along
with that, we couldn’t object to it, but for the question of whether

what he does really is a messenger’s work. To you, of course, he can’t
express any doubt; as he sees it, if he did he would be undermining
his own existence, oﬀending severely against the laws which he
thinks still govern him, and he doesn’t speak freely even to me.
I have to cajole and kiss his doubts away, and even then he won’t
admit that they are doubts. There is something of Amalia in him.
And of course he doesn’t tell me any of this, even though I’m his only
conﬁdante. But we do sometimes talk about Klamm. I have never
seen Klamm myself, you know, Frieda doesn’t much like me, and
would never have given me a glimpse of him, but of course it’s well
known in the village what he looks like, a few people have seen him,
everyone has heard of him, and it seems as if a picture of Klamm has
been built up out of rumours and certain ulterior motives which
distort that picture, yet in outline it is probably correct. But only in
outline. Otherwise it is apt to change, perhaps not even so apt to
change as Klamm’s real appearance. It’s said that he looks diﬀerent
when he comes into the village and when he leaves it, diﬀerent before
and after he has drunk a beer, diﬀerent awake and asleep, diﬀerent
on his own and in conversation, and it is quite understandable, with
all this, that he looks almost entirely diﬀerent up in the castle. Even
within the village, quite wide diﬀerences are reported: diﬀerences of
size, bearing, ﬁgure, of his beard, it’s only when the accounts come
to his clothes that luckily they tally; he always wears the same thing,
a black coat with long tails. Of course all these diﬀerences aren’t the
result of some magic trick, but they are easy to understand, arising
from the mood of the moment, the degree of excitement, the countless nuances of hope or despair felt by those who are privileged to see
Klamm, and then again, in general they catch only a brief glimpse of
him. I am telling you all this as Barnabas has often explained it to me,
and someone who is not personally and directly aﬀected can set his
mind at rest with that thought. But we can’t, and whether he really
speaks to Klamm is a matter of life and death to Barnabas.’ ‘It’s the
same for me,’ said K., and they moved closer together on the bench
by the stove. K. was indeed aﬀected by all this disturbing information from Olga, but he felt it was a considerable compensation to ﬁnd
people here who, at least apparently, had much the same experience
as he did, so that he could ally himself with them, striking up an
understanding in many points, not just some, as with Frieda. He was
in fact gradually abandoning any hope of success through a message

brought by Barnabas, but the worse a time Barnabas had up there,
the closer he was to him down here. K. would never have thought
that any of the villagers themselves could be making such unhappy
endeavours as Barnabas and his sister did. To be sure, that had not
been fully enough explained yet, and could change to its opposite; he
mustn’t let himself be led astray by Olga’s own nature, which was
certainly innocent, into believing in Barnabas’s honesty too. ‘Barnabas
knows the stories of Klamm’s appearance,’ Olga went on, ‘and he has
collected and compared many of them, perhaps too many, he himself
once even saw Klamm through a carriage window, or thought he saw
him, so he was well enough prepared to know who he was, and
yet—how would you explain this?—when he went into an oﬃce in
the castle, and one oﬃcial among several was pointed out to him, and
he was told that was Klamm, he didn’t recognize him, and for a long
time afterwards he couldn’t get used to the idea that the oﬃcial had
been Klamm. But if you ask Barnabas in what way that man was
diﬀerent from the usual idea of Klamm, he can’t reply, or rather he
does reply and describes the oﬃcial at the castle, but that description
tallies exactly with the description of Klamm that we know. “Well
then, Barnabas,” I say to him, “why do you doubt it, why torment
yourself ?” Whereupon, in obvious diﬃculty, he begins to enumerate
distinctive features of the oﬃcial at the castle, although he seems to
be inventing rather than reporting them, and in addition they are so
slight—a special way of nodding the head, for instance, or simply his
unbuttoned waistcoat—that you can’t possibly take them seriously.
What seems to me even more important is the way Klamm treats
Barnabas. Usually Barnabas is taken into a large room which is an
oﬃce, but it is not Klamm’s oﬃce, it is not any one person’s oﬃce.
All down its length this room is divided into two parts by a desk at
which people stand, one part of the room being narrow, where two
people can only just avoid colliding, and that’s the oﬃcials’ area, and
one part broad, the room for members of the public, the spectators,
the servants, the messengers. Large books lie open on the desk side
by side, with oﬃcials standing and reading most of them. But they
don’t always stick to the same book, and they don’t exchange the
books, they change places instead, and what surprises Barnabas most
is the way they have to squeeze past each other in changing places,
because the space is so cramped. In front of the desk and close to it
there are low tables at which clerks are seated, taking dictation when

the oﬃcials want them to. It always surprises Barnabas to see how
that is done. There is no express order from an oﬃcial, and the dictation is not loud, in fact you hardly notice that any dictation is going
on. It is more as if the oﬃcial is reading, as before, only he whispers
as he does so, and the clerk is listening. Often the oﬃcial dictates
so quietly that the clerk, sitting down, can’t hear him. Then he has
to keep jumping up to catch what is being dictated, sit down
again quickly, write it down, jump up again quickly, and so on. How
strange that is, how almost incomprehensible! Of course, Barnabas
has plenty of time to observe all this, for he stands in the viewing area
for hours, sometimes days, before Klamm’s glance falls on him. And
even if Klamm has seen him, and Barnabas stands to attention, nothing is certain yet, for Klamm can turn back from him to the book,
and forget him, which often happens. But what kind of a message
service is so unimportant? My heart sinks when Barnabas tells me in
the morning that he is going to the castle. The journey will probably
be futile, the day will probably be wasted, the hope will probably be
in vain. What’s the point of it? And down here the shoemaking work
piles up, no one does it, and Brunswick is pressing for it to be done
and delivered.’ ‘Very well,’ said K., ‘so Barnabas has to wait a long
time before he is given something to do. That’s understandable,
there seems to be an excessive number of employees there, not
everyone can be given work to do every day. You shouldn’t complain,
it could happen to anyone. After all, Barnabas is given work to do; he
has already brought me two letters,’ ‘It’s possible’, said Olga, ‘that
we are wrong to complain, particularly me, since I know all this only
by hearsay, and as a girl I can’t understand it as well as Barnabas,
who doesn’t tell me by any means everything. But now, let me tell
you about the letters, for instance those letters that were brought to
you. Barnabas doesn’t get them directly from Klamm, he gets them
from the clerk. On a random day at a random hour—that’s one reason why, easy as it may seem, the work is so tiring, for Barnabas has
to be on the alert all the time—the clerk remembers him and signals
to him to come over. It doesn’t seem to be Klamm’s doing; he is
quietly reading his book, and sometimes he is cleaning his pince-nez
when Barnabas arrives, though he does that often anyway, and then
he may look at him, supposing he can see without the pince-nez on,
which Barnabas doubts. Klamm’s eyes are closed, he seems to be
asleep and cleaning his pince-nez in a dream. Meanwhile the clerk

takes a letter for you out of the many ﬁles and papers under the table,
but it isn’t a letter for you that has just been written, judging by the
look of the envelope it is a very old letter that has been lying there for
a long time. But if it is an old letter, why has Barnabas been kept
waiting so long? And you as well, probably. And ﬁnally the letter too,
because by now it is probably ancient. All this gives Barnabas the
reputation of being a bad, slow messenger. However, the clerk
shrugs it oﬀ, gives Barnabas the letter, says: “From Klamm for K.,”
and with that Barnabas is dismissed. Now and then Barnabas comes
home out of breath, with the letter he has at last acquired next to his
skin, under his shirt, and we sit down on the bench here, as you and
I are sitting now, he tells me about it, and we think hard about every
detail, working out what he has achieved. We end up concluding that
it is very little, and even that little is questionable, and Barnabas puts
the letter away and doesn’t feel like delivering it, so he takes up his
shoemaking work and spends the night sitting on his stool. That’s
how it is, K., those are my secrets, and now I suppose you won’t be
surprised any more that Amalia feels she can do without them.’ ‘But
what about the letter?’ asked K. ‘The letter?’ said Olga. ‘Well, after
a while, when I have pressed Barnabas enough, and meanwhile days
and weeks could have passed, he takes the letter and goes to deliver
it. He is very dependent on me in such practical details, because once
I have overcome the ﬁrst impression of what he is telling me, I can
understand what it is that he’s unable to do, probably because he
knows more about it. And so I can keep asking him, for instance:
“What do you really want, Barnabas? What kind of career do you
dream of, what is your ambition? Do you want to go so far as to
abandon us, abandon me, entirely? Is that your aim? I think I should
believe that, shouldn’t I, because otherwise there’d be no understanding why you are so dreadfully dissatisﬁed with what you have
already achieved. Look around you, see if any of our neighbours has
done as well. To be sure, their situation is diﬀerent from ours, and
they have no reason to look for a better way of life, but even without
making the comparison anyone can see that all is going very well for
you. There are obstacles, there are doubtful factors, there are disappointments, but that means only, as we knew before, that no one
gives you anything gratis, you must strive for every little thing
yourself—one more reason to be proud and not downcast. And then
you are ﬁghting for us too, surely? Does that mean nothing to you?

Doesn’t it give you fresh strength? And doesn’t the fact that I feel
proud, almost arrogant, to know that I have such a brother give you
a sense of security? It is true that you disappoint me not in what
you have achieved at the castle but in what I have achieved in you.
You can go to the castle, you are a constant visitor to the oﬃces, you
spend whole days in the same room as Klamm, you are a publicly
acknowledged messenger, you carry important messages, you are all
that, you can do all those things, and then you come down—and
instead of our falling into each other’s arms weeping for happiness,
all your courage seems to desert you at the sight of me, you doubt
everything, nothing but the shoemaker’s last seems to tempt you,
and you do nothing with the letter which guarantees our future.”
That’s how I talk to him, and after I have repeated it for days on
end he sighs, picks up the letter, and goes out. But that’s probably
not the inﬂuence of my remarks, for he is on his way up to the castle
again—where else?—and he wouldn’t dare to go there without
carrying out his errand.’ ‘Well, you are right in everything you tell him,’
said K., ‘you have summed it all up extremely well. How remarkably
clearly you think!’ ‘No,’ said Olga, ‘you’re deceived, and perhaps I
am deceiving him. For what has he achieved? He can enter an oﬃce,
but it doesn’t even seem to be a real oﬃce, more of an anteroom to
the oﬃces, perhaps not even that, perhaps a room where all who may
not enter the real oﬃces must be detained. He speaks to Klamm, but
is it really Klamm? Isn’t it more likely someone who simply resembles Klamm? A secretary, perhaps, who at a pinch looks a little like
Klamm, and tries to be even more like him, and then puts on airs in
Klamm’s sleepy, drowsy way. That part of his nature is the easiest to
imitate, many try to copy it, although they carefully leave the rest of
him alone. And a man like Klamm—in such demand, although it is
so diﬃcult to come into his presence—easily takes on diﬀerent forms
in people’s minds. For instance, Klamm has a village secretary by the
name of Momus. Ah, so you know him? He too keeps his distance,
but I have seen him several times. A strong young gentleman, isn’t
he? And he probably doesn’t look at all like Klamm. Yet you can
ﬁnd people in the village who would swear that Momus is Klamm,
and that there really is a similarity between the two of them, but
it’s a similarity that Barnabas always doubts. And there is everything to back up his doubts. Is Klamm going to thrust his way into a
common room here among other oﬃcials, pencil behind his ear?

That’s most unlikely. Barnabas has the slightly childish habit of
saying sometimes—but this is when he’s in a conﬁdent mood—“The
oﬃcial looks very like Klamm; if he were sitting in an oﬃce of his
own, at a desk of his own, and his name were on the door, well, I’d
have no doubts at all.” Childish but sensible. It would be even more
sensible, however, if when Barnabas is up there he would ask several
people how things really stand. After all, from what he says there are
plenty of people going around in that room. And wouldn’t what they
say be much more reliable than the information of the man who
showed him Klamm unasked? With so many up there, they must
surely come up with points of reference of some kind, points of comparison would at least arise from the sheer number of them. That’s
not my idea, Barnabas thought of it, but he dares not act on it; he
dares not speak to anyone for fear he might lose his job through some
kind of unintentional infringement of unknown rules. That shows
you how insecure he feels. His insecurity, pitiful as it really is, shows
up his position more clearly than any description. How uncertain
and menacing everything there must seem if he dares not even open
his mouth to ask an innocent question! When I think of that I blame
myself for leaving him alone in those unknown rooms where such
things go on that even he, who is reckless rather than cowardly,
probably trembles for fear there.’
‘Now here I think you come to the crucial point,’ said K., ‘and this
is it. From all you have said, I think I now see the situation clearly.
Barnabas is too young for his responsibilities. It’s impossible to take
any of what he says seriously just like that. If he is half dead of fear
when he goes up to the oﬃces—well, he can’t notice anything there,
and if he is forced to talk about it here all the same, you’ll only get
confused fairy tales. I am not surprised. Awe of the authorities is innate
in all of you here, and then it is also dinned into you throughout your
lives in all manner of diﬀerent ways and from all sides, and you yourselves add to it as best you can. I’m saying nothing against that in
principle; if authorities are good authorities, why shouldn’t people go
in awe of them? But an uninformed youth like Barnabas, who has
never been far outside the village, ought not to be suddenly sent to the
castle and then expected to come back with faithful reports, whereupon everything he says is studied like a revelation, with everyone’s
own happiness depending on its interpretation. Nothing can be
more misguided. To be sure I, like you, let myself be led astray by

him, I placed my hopes on him and suﬀered disappointment through
him, both hopes and disappointment founded merely on his words,
which is to say that they had hardly any foundation at all.’ Olga did
not reply. ‘It will not be easy for me,’ said K. ‘to shake your conﬁdence in your brother, for I see how you love him and what you
expect of him. But I must do it, not least for the sake of your love and
your expectations. Listen: something—I don’t know what it is—keeps
preventing you from recognizing fully what Barnabas has not in fact
achieved himself but has been granted to him. He can go into the
oﬃces, or into an anteroom if you like, well, if it is an anteroom there
are doors leading further, barriers that can be crossed if you know
how to do it. To me, for instance, that anteroom is entirely inaccessible, for the time being anyway. I don’t know who Barnabas talks to
there, perhaps that clerk is the lowest of the servants, but even if he
is the lowest he can go to the next one up, and if he can’t go to him
he can at least give his name, and if he can’t give his name then he
can point to someone who will be able to give his name. The alleged
Klamm may not have anything in common with the real one, the
similarity may be visible only to Barnabas, whose eyes are blinded by
his excitement, the man may be the lowest of the oﬃcials, he may not
even be an oﬃcial at all, but he has some kind of work to do at that
desk, he is reading something or other in his big book, he whispers
something or other to the clerk, he is thinking something or other
when, after a long time, his eye falls on Barnabas, and even if none of
that is the case, and the man and what he does mean nothing, then
someone has appointed him to be there, and that person has done it
with intent of some kind. Given all that, I will say that yes, there’s
something in it, something is oﬀered to Barnabas, something or other
at least, and Barnabas is the only one to blame if he can’t get any
further than into doubt, fear, and hopelessness. And in saying so I’m
setting out by assuming the worst case, which in fact is very unlikely.
For we have the letters in our hands, not that I trust them much, but
I trust them far more than what Barnabas says. Even if they are old,
worthless letters picked at random out of a pile of other equally
worthless letters, with no more understanding than the canaries at
fairs have, pecking out people’s fortunes at random, well, even if that
is so, at least those letters bear some relation to my work. They are
obviously for me, if perhaps not for my own use, and as the village
mayor and his wife have shown, they were written by Klamm himself

and, again according to the village mayor, they have only private and
rather obscure yet weighty signiﬁcance.’ ‘Is that what the village
mayor really said?’ asked Olga. ‘Yes, he did,’ replied K. ‘Oh, I’ll tell
Barnabas,’ said Olga quickly, ‘it will encourage him so much.’ ‘He
doesn’t need encouragement,’ said K. ‘Encouraging him means telling him he’s right, he only has to go on as before, but that way he will
never get anywhere. You can encourage someone with his eyes blindfolded to see through the blindfold as much as you like, he’ll still
never see a thing. He can’t see until the blindfold is removed.
Barnabas needs help, not encouragement. Think about it: up there
are the authorities in their unimaginable greatness—I thought I had
some approximate idea of them before I came here, but how childish
that was!—well, up there are the authorities, and Barnabas comes
into contact with them, all on his own, a pitiful sight. That in itself
is too much honour for him, if he isn’t to spend the rest of his life
cast up, adrift, in some dark corner of the oﬃces.’ ‘Oh, K.,’ said
Olga, ‘don’t think that we underestimate the heavy burden of the
task that Barnabas has undertaken. We don’t fail in our awe of the
authorities. You said so yourself.’ ‘But it is awe gone astray,’ said K.
‘Awe in the wrong quarters, and that dishonours its object. Is it still
worthy to be called awe if Barnabas misuses the privilege of entry to
that room to spend idle days there, or if he comes down suspecting
and belittling those before whom he has just been trembling? Or if,
in despair or weariness, he fails to deliver letters at once, and doesn’t
come straight back with messages entrusted to him? I don’t call that
awe any more. But the blame for it goes further, it falls on you too,
Olga, I can’t spare you that. Although you think you are in awe of the
authorities, you sent Barnabas in all his youth and weakness and
isolation to the castle, or at least you didn’t keep him from going.’
‘As for your reproaches,’ said Olga, ‘I have levelled them against
myself for a long time. I am not to blame for sending Barnabas to the
castle, I didn’t send him, he went of his own accord, but I ought
perhaps to have kept him back by all possible means, by persuasion,
by cunning, by main force. Yes, I ought to have kept him from it,
but if today were that day of decision, if I were to feel the misery
of Barnabas and our family then as I do now, if Barnabas were to
move away from me again and go, gently and smiling, clearly aware
of all the responsibility and danger, then even now I would not
stop him, in spite of all we have gone through since then, and I think

you yourself couldn’t act otherwise in my place. You don’t know our
miserable situation, and so you do us, and particularly Barnabas,
wrong. We had more hope then than we do now, but even then our
hope was not great, only our misery, and so it has remained. Hasn’t
Frieda told you about us?’ ‘She’s only given vague hints,’ said K.
‘Nothing deﬁnite, but even the name of your family upsets her.’
‘And the landlady too hasn’t said anything?’ ‘No, nothing.’ ‘Nobody
else either?’ ‘Nobody.’ ‘Well, of course not, how could anybody say
anything? Everyone knows something about us, either the truth so
far as it’s available to them, or at least some kind of rumour they’ve
heard or more usually invented themselves, and they all think about
us more than is necessary, but no one will tell the story straight out.
They’re afraid to put these things into words. And they’re right too.
It’s diﬃcult to dredge it all up, even to tell you about it, K., and isn’t
it possible that when you’ve heard it you too will go away and won’t
want to know any more about us, however little it seems to aﬀect you
personally? Then we’ll have lost you, and now, I confess, you mean
almost more to me than all the service that Barnabas has so far rendered to the castle. And yet—this contradiction has been tormenting
me all evening—and yet you must know about it, for otherwise you
will not be able to get an idea of our situation, you will still be unjust
to Barnabas, which would particularly distress me, we would lack the
full agreement between ourselves that we need, and you could neither help us nor accept our help, unoﬃcial though it is. But there’s
still one question. Do you want to know what it is?’ ‘Why do you
ask?’ said K. ‘If it’s necessary, yes, I want to know it, but why do you
ask like that?’ ‘Out of superstition,’ said Olga. ‘You will be drawn
into our aﬀairs in all innocence, and you won’t be much more to
blame than Barnabas.’ ‘Go on, quick, tell me,’ said K. ‘I’m not afraid.
Your feminine anxiety makes it seem even worse than it is.’

17
Amalia’s Secret
‘Judge for yourself,’ said Olga, ‘and by the way, it sounds very simple, so you may not understand at once what great signiﬁcance it can
have. There’s an oﬃcial at the castle called Sortini.’* ‘Oh, I’ve heard
of him before,’ said K. ‘He had something to do with my appointment.’ ‘I don’t think so,’ said Olga. ‘Sortini hardly ever appears in
public. Aren’t you mixing him up with Sordini, spelt with a “d”?’
‘You’re right,’ said K. ‘It was Sordini.’ ‘Yes,’ said Olga. ‘Sordini is
very well known, he’s one of the most industrious of the oﬃcials,
and there are many stories about him. Sortini, on the other hand, is
extremely reserved and a stranger to most of us. It’s over three years
ago that I saw him for the ﬁrst and last time, on 3 July* at a ﬁre-brigade
festival. The castle joined in the festivities by donating a new ﬁre
engine. Sortini, who was said to be partly involved in the aﬀairs of
the ﬁre brigade, or perhaps he was only deputizing for someone
else—the oﬃcials very commonly deputize for each other, so it’s
diﬃcult to be sure which of them is responsible for what—anyway,
Sortini took part in the presentation of the ﬁre engine, and of course
other people from the castle came too, oﬃcials and their servants,
and Sortini, as suits his character, kept right in the background. He
is a small, puny, thoughtful gentleman, and all who saw him noticed
the frown on his brow, remarkable because all the lines in it—and
there were a great many, although he can’t be over forty—fanned out
over his forehead to the bridge of his nose. I’ve never seen anything
like it. Well, so the day of the ﬁre-brigade festival came. We, I mean
Amalia and I, had been looking forward to it for weeks. We had
freshened up our Sunday best, and Amalia’s dress in particular was
very ﬁne, with her white blouse ruﬄed in front with row upon row
of lace. Our mother had lent Amalia all her own lace. I was envious
at the time and cried half the night before the party. Only when the
landlady of the Bridge Inn came to look us over in the morning—’
‘The landlady of the Bridge Inn?’ asked K. ‘Yes,’ said Olga, ‘she was
great friends with us, so she dropped in, and she had to admit that
Amalia had the advantage over me, and to cheer me up she lent me

her own Bohemian garnet necklace. When we were ready to go out,
and Amalia was standing there in front of me, we all admired her and
Father said: “Amalia will ﬁnd a sweetheart today, you mark my
words,” and then, I don’t know why, I took oﬀ the necklace, though
I’d been so proud of it, and put it round Amalia’s neck. I wasn’t at
all envious any more. I acknowledged her triumph, and I thought
everyone was sure to pay her tribute. Perhaps we felt surprised that
she looked diﬀerent from usual, because she wasn’t really beautiful,
but that dark glance of hers, she’s kept it ever since, passed right over
us, and we instinctively felt like bowing to her and almost did.
Everyone noticed, including Lasemann and his wife, who came to
fetch us.’ ‘Lasemann?’ asked K. ‘Yes, Lasemann,’ said Olga. ‘We were
highly respected at the time, and in fact the party couldn’t very well
have begun without us, because our father was Trainer Number Three
with the ﬁre brigade.’ ‘Was your father still so robust at the time?’
asked K. ‘Father?’ asked Olga, as if she didn’t entirely understand the
question. ‘Why, three years ago he was still a relatively young man.
For instance, during a ﬁre at the Castle Inn he carried out one of the
oﬃcials on his back at a run, a heavy man called Galater.* I was there
myself—there was no danger of a real conﬂagration, it was the dry
wood stacked beside a stove that started smoking, that was all, but
Galater took fright and called out of the window for help. So the ﬁre
brigade came, and my father had to carry him out even though the
ﬁre was extinguished by then. Well, Galater doesn’t move easily, so
he has to be cautious in such cases. I’m telling you this only on my
father’s account. But it can’t be much more than three years since
that day, and now see how he sits there.’ Only then did K. see that
Amalia was back in the room, but she was some way away from them,
at the table with her parents, where she was feeding her mother, who
couldn’t move her arthritic arms, and talking to her father, asking
him to wait patiently for his meal, she would soon get around to feeding him too. But what she said had no eﬀect, for her father, greedily
waiting for his soup, overcame his own physical weakness and tried
sometimes sipping soup from his spoon, sometimes drinking it
straight from the plate, and he grumbled when he couldn’t manage
either, for the spoon was empty long before it reached his mouth,
and when he tried the plate his drooping moustache but not his
mouth got into the soup, which sprayed and dripped all over the
place, anywhere except into the old man’s mouth. ‘Is this what three

years have done to him?’ asked K., but he still felt revulsion rather
than pity for the old people at that corner of the family table. ‘Three
years,’ said Olga slowly, ‘or rather, just a few hours at a party. The
festival was held on a meadow outside the village, by the stream.
There was already a large crowd when we arrived, and a great many
people had come from the neighbouring villages too, the noise was
really bewildering. First of all, of course, our father took us to see the
new ﬁre engine, and he laughed with delight at the sight of it. A new
ﬁre engine made him a happy man; he began touching it and explaining it to us, he wouldn’t let anyone say a word to contradict him or
seem cool about it in any way, and if he wanted to point out something underneath the ﬁre engine we all had to bend down and almost
crawl under it. Barnabas, who was reluctant to do that, earned himself a slap. Only Amalia took no notice of the ﬁre engine, but stood
there very upright in her beautiful dress, and no one dared say anything to her. I sometimes went over to her and took her arm, but she
still said nothing. Even today I can’t explain to myself how it came
about that we stood there so long by the ﬁre engine, and only when
our father moved away from it did we notice Sortini, who had obviously been behind the engine all this time, leaning against a lever that
operated it. There was certainly a very loud noise, not just the kind
you usually hear at parties, because the castle had also sent the ﬁre
brigade some trumpets, special instruments on which you could play
the wildest of music with very little diﬃculty or eﬀort, even a child
could have done it. Hearing that noise, you’d have thought the
Turks* were upon us, and no one could get used to it. We all jumped
every time the trumpets sounded. And new as they were, everyone
wanted to try playing one, and since it was a public festival one and
all were allowed to have a go. There were some of those trumpetplayers around us, perhaps attracted by the sight of Amalia, and it
was diﬃcult to think straight in such a racket. It was as much as we
could do to pay attention to the ﬁre engine as well, as our father
demanded, and that was why we failed to notice Sortini, whom we
hadn’t known at all before, for such an unusually long time. “There’s
Sortini,” Lasemann whispered to our father at last; I was standing
close to them. Our father bowed deeply and signed frantically
to us to bow too. Without ever meeting him, our father had always
respected Sortini as an expert on the ﬁre brigade, and had often mentioned him at home, so now seeing him in person was a great surprise

and meant a lot to us. However, Sortini took no notice of us, it wasn’t
his way to notice people, and in fact most of the oﬃcials seemed
indiﬀerent to all they saw in public. In addition he was tired; only his
oﬃcial duty kept him down here, and it’s not always the worst of the
oﬃcials who ﬁnd such duties as representing the castle a severe trial.
Now that they were there, other oﬃcials and their servants mingled
with the people, but Sortini stayed put beside the ﬁre engine, his
silence repelling everyone who tried to approach him with some
request or ﬂattering remark. So it was that he noticed us only after
we had noticed him. It wasn’t until we bowed respectfully, and
Father began making excuses for us, that he glanced our way, looked
wearily from one to another of us, as if he could only sigh to see yet
another person standing by the person before—until he came to
Amalia, and his eyes lingered on her. He had to look up at her,
because she was much taller than he was. Then he gave a start of
surprise, and climbed over the shafts of the ﬁre engine to get closer
to Amalia. We misunderstood that at ﬁrst and, led by our father, we
all tried to approach him, but he raised a hand to fend us oﬀ and then
waved us away. That was all. We teased Amalia, saying she really had
found a sweetheart, and stupid as we were, we were cracking jokes all
afternoon, but Amalia was more silent than ever. “She’s head over
heels in love with Sortini,” said Brunswick, who is always rather
coarse and doesn’t understand natures like Amalia’s, but this time we
almost agreed with him. Altogether, we were in a mood for tomfoolery that day, and all of us except Amalia were slightly dazed by the
sweet wine from the castle when we came home after midnight.’
‘What about Sortini?’ asked K. ‘Ah yes, Sortini,’ said Olga. ‘I saw
Sortini many times in passing during the festivities, sitting on the
shafts of the ﬁre engine with his arms crossed over his chest, and
he stayed there until the carriage from the castle came to fetch him.
He didn’t even stay to see the ﬁre brigade drilling, in which our
father distinguished himself more than anyone else of his age, hoping
that Sortini was watching.’ ‘And did you hear no more of him?’ asked
K. ‘You all seem to go in great awe of Sortini.’ ‘Awe, oh yes,’ said Olga,
‘and yes, we did hear more of him. Next morning we were woken from
our tipsy slumbers by a cry from Amalia. The rest of us went straight
back to bed, but I was wide awake now, and ran to Amalia where she
stood at the open window, holding a letter that a man had just
handed in. The man was waiting for an answer. Amalia had read the

letter—it was a short one—and was holding it in her hand, which
hung down limply by her side. I always loved her so much when she
looked as tired as that! I knelt down beside her and read the letter. As
soon as I had ﬁnished it, Amalia took it back after a brief glance at
me, but she couldn’t bring herself to read it again. She tore it up,
threw the pieces out into the face of the man waiting outside, and
closed the window. That crucial morning was the turning point. I
call it crucial, but every moment of the afternoon before had been
just as crucial too.’ ‘And what did the letter say?’ asked K. ‘Oh yes, I
haven’t told you yet,’ said Olga. ‘Well, the letter was from Sortini
and addressed to “the girl with the garnet necklace”. I can’t reproduce the contents, but he was commanding her to go to him at the
Castle Inn, and at once too, Sortini said, because he would have to
leave again in half-an-hour’s time. The letter was written in the most
vulgar language, using words I had never heard before—I could only
half guess what they meant from the context. Anyone who didn’t
know Amalia and had read that letter would have thought her dishonoured by the fact that someone could dare to address her in such
a way, even though no man had ever touched her. And it wasn’t a
love letter, there wasn’t an aﬀectionate word in it, indeed Sortini was
obviously angry to think that the sight of Amalia had aﬀected him so
much and had taken his mind oﬀ his business. We worked out later
that Sortini had probably meant to go back up to the castle on the
evening of the festival, but had stayed in the village because of
Amalia, and in the morning, feeling angry with himself because he
hadn’t succeeded in forgetting her overnight, he had written that
letter. At ﬁrst you couldn’t help feeling indignant at its language and
its cold-blooded tone, but then its harsh threats would probably have
inspired fear in anyone but Amalia. Amalia, however, remained
indignant; she doesn’t know the meaning of fear for herself or for
other people. And as I crept back to bed, repeating to myself the
unﬁnished closing sentence of the letter: “You had better come at
once, or else—!” Amalia stayed where she was on the window-seat,
looking out as if she expected further messengers, and was ready to
treat every one of them as she had treated the ﬁrst.’ ‘So that’s what
the oﬃcials are like,’ said K., his voice faltering. ‘To think that there
are such characters among them! What did your father do? I hope he
complained of Sortini forcefully in the proper quarters, if he didn’t
decide to go straight to the Castle Inn as the shortest and most

certain way. The nastiest part of the story is not the insult to Amalia,
which could easily be rectiﬁed; I don’t know why you make so much
of it—how could Sortini really have disgraced Amalia for ever by
writing her such a letter? From what you say, one might suppose he
had, but that’s impossible: it would have been easy to get satisfaction
for Amalia, and the incident would have been forgotten in a few days,
so it wasn’t Amalia whom Sortini disgraced but himself. It’s from
Sortini that I recoil, from him and the idea that someone can so misuse his power. Well, his abuse of power failed here, because his
intentions were stated clearly, were entirely transparent, and he
found a stronger opponent in Amalia, but in a thousand other cases
where the circumstances were only slightly less favourable it could
have succeeded and never been noticed at all, even by the victim of
his abuse.’ ‘Hush,’ said Olga. ‘Amalia is looking at us.’ Amalia had
ﬁnished feeding her parents, and was now busy undressing her
mother; she had just undone her skirt, she placed her mother’s arms
around her neck, raised them slightly, stripped oﬀ the skirt, and then
sat quietly down again. Her father, still querulously protesting because
she was attending to her mother ﬁrst—obviously only because the old
woman was even more helpless than he was—tried undressing himself, perhaps to punish his daughter because he thought she was dawdling, but all the same he began with the least essential and easiest to
remove of his garments, the loose, outsize slippers in which his feet
ﬂopped about. But there was no way he could take them oﬀ; he had
to give up, breathing heavily, and leaned back stiﬄy in his chair.
‘You don’t understand what the crucial point was,’ said Olga. ‘You
may be right in all you say, but the crucial point was that Amalia
didn’t go to the Castle Inn. In itself, the way she treated the messenger might have been glossed over, that could have been hushed
up. It was because she didn’t go that our family was doomed, and
then her treatment of the messenger also became unpardonable, in
fact much was made of it for public consumption.’ ‘What?’ cried K.,
but he immediately lowered his voice when Olga raised her hands
pleadingly. ‘You, her own sister, are surely not saying that Amalia
ought to have obeyed Sortini and gone to the Castle Inn?’ ‘No,’ said
Olga, ‘heaven forbid, how can you think that? I know no one who is
as ﬁrmly in the right as Amalia in everything she does. If she had
gone to the Castle Inn I would have thought her conduct just as correct; but her refusal to go was heroic. As for me, I’ll admit to you

frankly, if I had received such a letter I would have gone. I couldn’t
have borne the fear of the consequences if I hadn’t, only Amalia
could face them. There were many ways out; another girl would have
made her face up prettily, for instance, and made sure it took her
some time, and then she would have gone to the Castle Inn to discover that Sortini had already gone, perhaps that he’d left directly
after sending the message, which in fact is very likely, for the gentlemen’s whims don’t last long. But Amalia didn’t do that or anything
like it, she was too deeply insulted and she returned a forthright
answer. If she had only somehow or other appeared to obey, if she
had just crossed the threshold of the Castle Inn that day, disaster
might have been averted. We have some very clever lawyers here
who know how to make anything you like out of almost nothing, but
in this case even that helpful nothing wasn’t available; on the contrary, we were left with the dishonouring of Sortini’s letter and the
insult oﬀered to his messenger.’ ‘But what disaster?’ said K. ‘And
what kind of lawyers? Surely Amalia couldn’t be prosecuted or actually punished for Sortini’s criminal behaviour?’ ‘Oh yes, she could,’
said Olga. ‘Not after a regular trial, of course, and she was not punished directly, but in another way, she and our whole family, and
now I suppose you are beginning to understand how harsh that punishment is. It seems to you unjust and monstrous, but that is not the
general opinion in the village; your view of the aﬀair is kind to us,
and ought to console us, and so it would if it didn’t obviously arise
from misconceptions. I can easily prove that to you, and forgive me
if I mention Frieda here, but apart from its ﬁnal outcome the relationship between Frieda and Klamm was very like the relationship
between Amalia and Sortini. That may shock you at ﬁrst, but you
will ﬁnd that I am right. And it is not a case of habit, feelings do not
become blunted by dint of habit when it’s a simple matter of judgement; one just has to abandon one’s misconceptions.’ ‘No, Olga,’ said
K. ‘I don’t know why you want to go dragging Frieda into this, it
wasn’t like that at all with her, so please don’t confuse two such fundamentally diﬀerent cases. But go on with your story.’ ‘Please,’ said
Olga, ‘don’t take oﬀence if I stand by my comparison. You still have
some misconceptions about Frieda too if you think you have to
defend her against a comparison. She is not to be defended, merely
praised. If I compare the cases I don’t say they are the same, they are
like black and white to each other, and Frieda is white. At the worst

people may laugh at Frieda, as I was ill-mannered enough to do in
the bar—I was very sorry for that later—but even those who laugh
at her, whether out of malice or envy, well, they can still laugh. But
Amalia can only be despised by those who aren’t her blood relations.
That’s why they are, as you say, fundamentally diﬀerent cases, but
all the same they are similar.’ ‘They are not similar,’ said K., shaking
his head indignantly. ‘Leave Frieda out of this. Frieda never received
any charming letter such as the one sent to Amalia by Sortini, and
Frieda really loved Klamm. Anyone who doubts that can ask her; she
still loves him today.’ ‘Are those such great diﬀerences?’ asked Olga.
‘Do you think Klamm might not have written to Frieda in just the
same terms? That’s how the gentlemen behave when they get up
from their desks; they’re ill at ease, in their distraction they will say
some very coarse things, not all of them, but many do. In Sortini’s
mind his letter to Amalia may have been written in total disregard of
what he actually set down on the paper. What do we know of the
gentlemen’s minds? Didn’t you hear the tone in which Klamm spoke
to Frieda for yourself, or haven’t you been told about it? Everyone
knows that Klamm is very coarse; I’m told he will say nothing for
hours on end, and then suddenly he comes out with something so
coarse that it makes you shudder. We don’t know anything like that
about Sortini, but then we aren’t acquainted with him anyway. All
we really know of him is that his name is very like Sordini’s, and but
for that similarity of their names we probably wouldn’t know anything at all about him. He probably also gets confused with Sordini
as an expert on the ﬁre brigade, because Sordini is the real expert,
but he makes use of the similarity of their names to land Sortini with
the duty of deputizing for him, so that he himself can go on with his
work undisturbed. Well, when a man as unused to the ways of the
world as Sortini is suddenly smitten by love for a village girl, naturally it’s not like the carpenter’s journeyman next door falling in love
with a girl. And we must remember that there is a great distance
between an oﬃcial and a shoemaker’s daughter, a distance that has to
be bridged somehow. Sortini tried it in that way, someone else might
try another. Yes, it is said that we all belong to the castle, and there
is no distance at all, no gap to be bridged, and in the usual way
that may be so, but unfortunately we’ve had an opportunity of seeing
that when it comes to the point it isn’t. Anyway, all this will have
made it easier for you to understand Sortini’s behaviour and see it as

less monstrous. In fact, compared with Klamm’s it is indeed far
easier to understand and far easier to bear, even to someone closely
concerned. When Klamm writes an aﬀectionate letter it is more
embarrassing than the coarsest letter that Sortini could pen. Don’t
misunderstand me, I wouldn’t venture to judge Klamm, I’m only
making the comparison because you won’t hear of it. But Klamm
acts like a military commander with women, he orders now one of
them and now another to come to him, he doesn’t keep any of them
for long, and then he orders them to leave again in just the same way.
Oh, Klamm wouldn’t even give himself the trouble of writing a letter
at all. And is it, by comparison, still a monstrous thing for Sortini,
who keeps himself to himself so much, about whose relationships
with women we know nothing, to say the least, to sit down one day
and write a letter in his ﬁne oﬃcial handwriting, even if it is a disgusting letter? And if there is no diﬀerence between that and
Klamm’s favours, but rather the opposite, then will Frieda’s love
create one? The relationship between the women and the oﬃcials,
believe me, is very diﬃcult to judge, or perhaps very easy. There is
never any lack of love in this place. The oﬃcials’ love is never unrequited. In that respect it isn’t praise to say of a girl—and of course
I’m not talking about Frieda—that she gave herself to an oﬃcial only
because she loved him. She loved him and gave herself to him, yes,
but there is nothing praiseworthy in it. However, you will say that
Amalia did not love Sortini. Well, she didn’t love him, or perhaps
she did love him after all, who can say? Not even Amalia herself.
How can she think she loved him if she rejected him in such strong
terms? Very likely no oﬃcial was ever rejected in those terms before.
Barnabas says that she still sometimes trembles with the same emotion as when she closed the window three years ago. That’s true too,
so there’s no need to ask her; she has broken with Sortini, and that’s
all she knows, she has no idea whether she loves him or not. But we
know that women can’t help loving oﬃcials when the oﬃcials turn to
them, indeed, they love the oﬃcials even before that, much as they
may deny it, and Sortini didn’t just turn to Amalia, he jumped over
the shafts of the ﬁre engine at the sight of her, he jumped over them
with his oﬃcial legs still stiﬀ from sitting working at his desk. But
Amalia is an exception, you will say. Yes, she is, she showed it when
she refused to go to Sortini, that was exceptional enough. However,
to say that in addition she didn’t love Sortini would be almost too

exceptional, that would be beyond understanding. We were certainly
blind that afternoon, but the fact that we thought we saw something
of Amalia’s lovesick state even through the mists before our eyes
showed that we did have some idea of it. Well, put all this together,
and what’s the diﬀerence between Frieda and Amalia then? Only that
Frieda did what Amalia wouldn’t do.’ ‘Maybe,’ said K., ‘but for me
the main diﬀerence is that Frieda is my ﬁancée, while fundamentally
Amalia matters to me only in being the sister of Barnabas, who is a
castle messenger, and perhaps her fate is linked to Barnabas’s
employment. If an oﬃcial had done her such a great injustice as it
seemed to me at ﬁrst from your story, it would have weighed on my
mind a great deal, but even so, more as a public scandal than because
of Amalia’s private suﬀering. Now, after your story, the picture does
indeed change into one that I don’t entirely understand, but you are
the one telling the tale and making it sound plausible enough, so I’ll
be perfectly happy to drop the subject entirely, I am no ﬁreman,
what does Sortini matter to me? Frieda does matter to me, however,
and it is strange to me that you, whom I trusted entirely and would
like to go on trusting, keep attacking Frieda through Amalia in that
roundabout way, trying to make me suspect her. I don’t think you are
doing it on purpose, let alone with malicious intent, or I would have
had to leave long ago. So you aren’t doing it on purpose, circumstances make you do it, out of love for Amalia you try to elevate her
above all other women, and as you can’t ﬁnd enough that’s praiseworthy in Amalia herself for your purpose, you resort to running
other women down. What Amalia did is remarkable, but the more
you tell me about it, the less anyone can say whether it was a great or
a small thing to do, clever or foolish, heroic or cowardly. Amalia
keeps her reasons to herself, and no one will worm them out of her.
Frieda, on the other hand, has done nothing remarkable, only followed her heart. That’s clear to all who look at the situation in the
right light, anyone can see that, there’s no room for gossip. However,
I don’t want to run Amalia down myself or defend Frieda, I just want
to make my feelings for Frieda clear to you, and point out that any
attack on Frieda is also an attack on me. I came here of my own free
will, and I have settled here of my own free will, but all that has happened since, and above all my future prospects—sombre as they may
be, still, they do exist—all this I owe to Frieda, there’s no arguing
that away. It is true that I was appointed here as a land surveyor, but

that was only for show, people were playing with me, driving me
from pillar to post, and they are still playing with me today, but it’s
so much more involved now, I have gained in stature, so to speak,
and that in itself is something. Little as it all may mean, I have a
home, a position, and real work; I have a ﬁancée who, when I have
other business, will do my work for me, I am going to marry her and
become a member of this community, and outside the oﬃcial relationship I have a personal one with Klamm, even if so far I admit I
have been unable to exploit it. Isn’t that something? And when I visit
you, who is it you’re welcoming in? To whom do you conﬁde your
family’s story? From whom do you hope for a chance of some kind
of help, even if only a tiny, improbable chance? Not from the land
surveyor who only a week ago was forcibly expelled from Lasemann’s
house by the householder himself and Brunswick, no, you hope to
get it from a man who already has a certain power, but I owe that
power to Frieda, who is so modest that if you were to try asking her
about it she would certainly claim to know nothing at all. And yet it
seems to me that Frieda in her innocence has done more than Amalia
in all her arrogance, because you see, I have the impression that you
are looking for help for Amalia. And from whom? In fact from none
other than Frieda.’ ‘Did I really speak so badly of Frieda?’ said Olga.
‘I certainly didn’t mean to, and I didn’t think I had, but it is possible,
in our situation we are at odds with all the world, and if we begin to
complain of our fate we get carried away, we hardly know where.
And you are right, there is a great diﬀerence now between us and
Frieda, and it is as well to emphasize that for once. Three years ago
we were well-to-do girls, and Frieda only an orphan who was dairymaid at the Bridge Inn; we passed her by without a glance, we were
certainly too arrogant, but that’s how we had been brought up. That
evening in the Castle Inn, however, you saw the present state of
aﬀairs: Frieda with the whip in her hand, and I among the servants.
But it is even worse. Frieda may despise us, that’s in line with her
position, it’s inevitable in the circumstances. However, who does not
despise us? Those who decide to despise us join the vast majority of
society. Do you know Frieda’s successor? Her name is Pepi. I met
her only yesterday evening; she used to be a chambermaid. She
certainly despises me even more than Frieda does. She saw me from
the window as I came to fetch beer, hurried to the door, and locked it.
I had to spend a long time begging her to open the door, and before

she would let me in she made me promise her the ribbon in my hair.
But when I gave it to her she threw it away in a corner. Well, she may
despise me, for in part I am dependent on her goodwill, and she is a
barmaid at the Castle Inn, although only temporarily, and she certainly doesn’t have the qualiﬁcations for a permanent appointment
there. You have only to hear how the landlord speaks to Pepi, and
compare it with the tone he used to adopt in talking to Frieda. But
that doesn’t keep Pepi from despising Amalia too, Amalia, a glance
from whose eyes alone would be enough to send little Pepi with all
her braids and bows running out of the room faster than she could go
on her fat little legs of her own accord. Yesterday I heard her, yet
again, saying such outrageous things about Amalia that ﬁnally the
guests took my side, although in the same way as you have seen for
yourself.’ ‘How frightened you are,’ said K. ‘I was only giving Frieda
her due, I wasn’t trying to run you down, as you now seem to think.
Your family seems special to me as well, I have not hidden it, but
how that special quality can arouse disdain I don’t understand.’
‘Oh, K.,’ said Olga, ‘I’m afraid even you will understand it yet. Can’t
you see how Amalia’s conduct to Sortini was what ﬁrst caused that
disdain?’ ‘That really would be strange,’ said K. ‘Amalia may be
admired or condemned for her conduct, but why disdained? And if
people really feel disdain for Amalia, out of some feeling that I don’t
understand, why would it be extended to the rest of you, her innocent
family? It really is too bad if Pepi despises you, and if I am ever in the
Castle Inn again I shall give her a good scolding.’ ‘But K.,’ said Olga,
‘if you were to try changing the minds of everyone who despises us
it would be hard work, because it all starts with the castle. I still
remember the late morning of that same day. Brunswick, who was our
assistant at the time, had come as usual; our father had given him work
to do and sent him home, and we were sitting at lunch, everyone was
very lively except for Amalia and me, our father kept talking about
yesterday’s festivities. He had all kinds of plans for the ﬁre brigade.
The castle, you see, has its own ﬁre brigade and had sent a detachment of it to the party. There had been a great deal of discussion with
the castle ﬁremen, the gentlemen from the castle had seen all that our
own ﬁremen could do, and the result was very much in our favour;
there had been talk of the need to reorganize the castle ﬁre brigade,
instructors from the village would be called in, some of them were
being considered, and our father hoped that he would be chosen.

He was talking about it now, and as he had a pleasant habit of talking
at length at mealtimes he sat there, his arms resting on the table, and
as he looked out of the open window and up at the sky his face was
so young, so happy and hopeful—and I was never to see him like that
again. Then Amalia said, with an air of knowing better that we had
not seen in her before, that we ought not to trust the gentlemen very
much when they said such things; the gentlemen liked to say something pleasing on such occasions, but it meant very little or nothing
at all. No sooner was it said than it was forgotten for ever, but next
time people would fall for their tricks again. Our mother reproved
her for saying such things, and our father just laughed at her worldlywise air of experience, but then he stopped short, seemed to be
looking for something that he only now noticed was missing, but
nothing was gone, and then he said that Brunswick had said something about a messenger and a torn-up letter. He asked if we knew
anything about it, who was the letter for or about, what had happened? We girls said nothing. Barnabas, as young as a little lamb at
the time, said something particularly silly or bold, we talked of other
things, and the matter was forgotten.’

18
Amalia’s Punishment
‘But soon afterwards questions were being ﬁred at us from all sides
about that letter. Friends and enemies called to see us, acquaintances
and strangers, but no one stayed long. Our best friends were in more
of a hurry than anyone to say goodbye. Lasemann, usually slow and
solemn in his manner, came in as if he just wanted to examine the
size of the room, took a look around the place, and he’d ﬁnished. It
was like some horrifying children’s game when Lasemann ﬂed, and
Father excused himself from talking to some other visitors and hurried after him to the front door of the house, where he gave up.
Brunswick came and told Father that he wanted to set up in business
for himself, he said it straight out—he was a clever fellow, he knew
how to seize his moment. Customers went into Father’s storeroom
looking for the boots they had brought for repair and taking them
away. At ﬁrst Father tried to make them change their minds—and
we all backed him up as well as we could—but later he gave up and
silently helped them to search. Line after line in the order book was
crossed out, the stocks of leather that had been left with us were
handed back, debts were paid, it all passed oﬀ without any argument.
People were glad to be able to cut their links with us quickly and
completely; they might suﬀer a loss, but that wasn’t a major consideration. And ﬁnally, as anyone could have foreseen, along came
Seemann the captain of the ﬁre brigade. I still see the scene before
me: Seemann so tall and strong, but slightly stooped and tubercular,
always serious, he can’t laugh at all, standing in front of my father
whom he admired, in private he’d held out the prospect of appointment as deputy ﬁre chief to him, and now he had to tell him that the
Association was dismissing him and asking him to return his diploma.
The people there in our house stopped what they were doing and
crowded into a circle around the two men. Seemann can’t say a word,
he only claps my father on the shoulder as if knocking out of him the
words that he himself ought to say and can’t ﬁnd. As he does so he
keeps on laughing, probably in the hope of soothing himself and
everyone else a little, but as he can’t laugh, no one has ever heard him

laugh, it doesn’t occur to anyone that he is laughing. From then on,
however, Father is too tired and despairing to help Seemann out.
Indeed, he seems too tired to take in what’s going on at all. We were
all equally despairing, but as we were young we couldn’t believe in
such total disaster, we kept thinking that with all these visitors arriving, someone would come at last to stop the process and make everything go back to where it used to be. Seemann, we foolishly thought,
was just the man for the part. We waited in suspense for clear words
to emerge from his ﬁts of laughter. What was there to laugh about
except the stupid injustice being done to us? Oh, ﬁre chief, ﬁre chief,
do talk to these people, we thought, and crowded about him, but that
just made him turn round and round in a funny way. At last, however, he began—well, not to do as we secretly wished, but to speak
after all in response to the encouraging or angry cries of the others.
We still had some hope. He began by praising Father, called him an
ornament to the ﬁre service, an incomparable example to the next
generation, an indispensable member of the ﬁre brigade whose
departure must be a heavy blow to it. That was all very well, and if
only he had ended there! But he went on. If, none the less, the Fire
Service Association had decided to ask our father to resign his post,
although only temporarily, everyone would know how serious were
the grounds that forced the Association to do so. Yesterday’s festivities, he said, would not have been so good without Father’s brilliant
achievements, but those very achievements had attracted a particular
degree of oﬃcial attention, a spotlight was now turned on the
Association, and it must be even more careful of its pure reputation
than before. And then there had been the insult to the messenger, the
Fire Service Association could ﬁnd no other way out, and he,
Seemann, he said, had assumed the onerous duty of saying so. He
hoped Father would not make things even more diﬃcult for him.
Seemann was so glad to have got it over and done with that he wasn’t
even very considerate any more, he pointed to the diploma hanging
on the wall and crooked his ﬁnger at it. Our father nodded and went
to take it down, but his hands were shaking so much that he couldn’t
get it oﬀ the hook, and I climbed on a chair to help him. And from
that moment on it was all over; he didn’t even take his diploma out of
the frame but handed the whole thing to Seemann just as it was. Then
he sat down in a corner, did not move, and spoke to no one any more.
We had to deal with all those people as best we could by ourselves.’

‘And where do you see the inﬂuence of the castle in that?’ asked K.
‘It doesn’t seem to have done anything yet. What you have told me
about so far was only the unreasoning anxiety of the people, enjoyment of their neighbour’s misfortunes, unreliable friendships—things
that we meet with every day, and a certain pettiness on your father’s
part too (or so it seems to me), for what was that diploma? Conﬁrmation
of his abilities, and he still had those, they made him all the more
indispensable, and he could really have made things diﬃcult for the
ﬁre chief only by throwing the diploma on the ﬂoor at his feet once
the man had spoken the ﬁrst word. But characteristically, as I see it,
you don’t mention Amalia at all; Amalia, whose fault it all was, was
probably standing calmly in the background watching the devastation.’ ‘No, no,’ said Olga, ‘it was no one’s fault, no one could act in
any other way, it was all the inﬂuence of the castle.’ ‘The inﬂuence
of the castle,’ Amalia repeated. She had come in from the yard,
unnoticed; her parents had been in bed for some time. ‘Are you telling stories about the castle? Are you still sitting together? Even
though you wanted to leave at once, K., and now it’s nearly ten.
Don’t such stories trouble you at all? There are people here who
feed on stories like that, they sit together the way you two are
sitting here and ply one another with gossip. But you don’t seem to
me to be one of them yourself.’ ‘Yes, I am,’ said K. ‘I am certainly
one of them, and I’m not impressed by those who don’t care for
such stories and leave them to others.’ ‘Ah, well,’ said Amalia,
‘people have interests of very diﬀerent kinds. I once heard of a young
man who was busy thinking about the castle day and night, he
neglected all else, there were fears for his sanity because his whole
mind was up there in the castle. However, in the end it turned out
that he wasn’t thinking of the castle at all, only of the daughter of
a woman who washed the dishes in the oﬃces there. He got his
girl and then everything was all right again.’ ‘I think I’d like that
man,’ said K. ‘I doubt whether you’d like the man,’ said Amalia, ‘but
you might like his wife. Now, don’t let me disturb you, I’m going to
bed myself, and I’ll have to put the light out for my parents’ sake;
they drop oﬀ to sleep at once, but their deep sleep lasts only for an
hour, and after that the smallest glimmer of light disturbs them.
Goodnight.’ And sure enough, the room was darkened at once.
Amalia probably made herself a bed somewhere on the ﬂoor beside
her parents’ bed. ‘Who is that young man she was talking about?’

asked K. ‘I don’t know,’ said Olga. ‘Maybe Brunswick, although it
doesn’t sound quite like him, maybe someone else. It’s not always easy
to understand exactly what Amalia means, because you often can’t tell
whether she is serious or speaking ironically. She’s usually serious,
but she may be ironic.’ ‘Never mind the interpretations!’ said K.
‘How did you come to depend on her so much? Did you feel the same
before the great disaster, or only afterwards? And don’t you ever feel
a wish to be independent of her? Then again, have you any sensible
reason for depending on her? She is the youngest, and ought to obey
you. Guilty or innocent, she brought misfortune on your family.
Instead of asking each of you to forgive her every new day, she carries
her head higher than anyone, cares for nothing except your parents—I expect she feels sorry for them—doesn’t want to be “in the
know” about anything, as she puts it, and when she does at last speak
to the rest of you, “she’s usually serious, but she may be ironic”. Or
is it because of her beauty, which you sometimes mention, that she
rules the rest of you? Well, you are all three very much alike, but
what distinguishes her from you and Barnabas is not in her favour,
not at all. Even when I ﬁrst set eyes on her, her dull, unloving look
alarmed me. And although she may be the youngest you wouldn’t
know it from her outward appearance. She has the look of those
women who hardly age at all, but have never been truly young. You
see her every day, you don’t notice how hard her face is. That’s why,
when I think about it, I can’t even take Sortini’s fondness for her
very seriously. Perhaps he just meant to punish her with that letter,
not summon her to him.’ ‘I don’t want to talk about Sortini,’ said
Olga. ‘Anything is possible with the gentlemen from the castle,
whether we’re talking about the most beautiful girl or the ugliest. But
otherwise you are quite wrong about Amalia. Look, I have no reason
in particular to win you over to Amalia’s side, and if all the same I am
trying to do so, it is only for your own sake. In some way or other
Amalia was the cause of our misfortune, that’s certain, but even
Father, who was worst aﬀected by the disaster, and could never control his tongue very well, certainly not at home, even Father has
never spoken a word of reproach to Amalia, not at the worst of times.
And that’s not because, say, he approved of what Amalia did; how
could he, who revered Sortini, have approved of it? He couldn’t even
remotely understand it, he’d gladly have sacriﬁced himself and all he
had to Sortini, although not in the way he actually did, not in the

shadow of Sortini’s probable anger. I say probable anger because we
never heard any more of Sortini; if he had been reserved before, from
then on he might not have existed at all. And you should have seen
Amalia at that time. We all knew that no actual punishment would
be inﬂicted. Everyone simply ostracized us, here as well as in the
castle. But while of course we noticed the villagers here withdrawing
from us, there was no sign from the castle. We hadn’t noticed the
castle paying us any special attention earlier, so how could we notice
any change now? This calm state of aﬀairs was the worst of it, not
ostracism by the villagers, not by a long way, they hadn’t done it out
of any kind of conviction, perhaps they had nothing serious against
us, their disdain had not reached its present extent, they had
acted only out of fear, and now they were waiting to see what would
happen next. We were not yet in want; everyone who owed money
had paid us, the ﬁnal balance had been to our advantage, and as for
what we lacked in the way of food, relations helped us out in secret.
That was easy, for it was harvest time, although we had no ﬁelds
ourselves and no one would let us work for them. For the ﬁrst time
in our lives, we were condemned almost to idleness. So there we sat
together behind closed windows in the heat of July and August. And
nothing happened. No invitation, no news, no visit, nothing.’ ‘Well,’
said K., ‘since nothing happened, and you didn’t expect any punishment to be inﬂicted, what were you all frightened of ? What strange
folk you are!’
‘How can I explain it to you?’ said Olga. ‘We didn’t fear anything
in the future, we just suﬀered in the present, we were in the middle
of our punishment. The villagers were waiting for us to come back to
them, for Father to open his workshop again, for Amalia, whose
clever needle could make lovely dresses, although only for the ﬁnest
people, to be taking orders again, they were all sorry for what they
had done. When a highly esteemed family is suddenly entirely
excluded from village life, everyone suﬀers in some way; they had
only thought they were doing their duty when they ostracized us,
and we would have done just the same in their place. They hadn’t
even known exactly what it was all about, just that the messenger had
returned to the Castle Inn with a handful of scraps of paper; Frieda
had seen him go and then come back, had exchanged a couple of
words with him, and immediately passed on what she had learnt,
but again not out of hostility to us, only because it was her duty, as it

would have been anyone’s duty in a similar situation. So now a happy
solution of the whole thing would have been—how shall I put
it?—the most welcome outcome to the people here. If we’d suddenly
turned up with the news that everything was all right again, perhaps
that it had been just a misunderstanding which was now entirely
cleared up, or again that, yes, an oﬀence had been committed but
amends had been made, or—and even this would have satisﬁed
people here—that through our connections in the castle we had succeeded in getting remission of everything, well, then we would
certainly have been taken back, received with open arms, with kisses
and embraces, people would have thrown parties; I’ve seen that kind
of thing several times in other cases. But not even such news as that
would have been necessary; if we had only come of our own accord
and oﬀered ourselves, picked up our old connections without another
word about the letter, it would have been enough. Everyone would
happily have stopped mentioning the subject, for as well as fear it
was mainly the embarrassment of the whole business that had separated them from us, they merely wanted not to have to hear about it,
talk about it, think about it, feel it aﬀecting them in any way at all. If
Frieda mentioned it she didn’t do so for pleasure, but in defence of
herself and everyone around her, to alert the community to the fact
that something had occurred from which they should keep their
distance most carefully. We as a family weren’t at the centre of the
aﬀair, only the incident itself, and we were concerned only because
we had become involved in the incident. So if we had simply come
out in public, leaving the past behind, had shown by our behaviour
that we had got over it, had appeared, so to speak, not to mind about
it, and people in general had thus been convinced that the aﬀair,
whatever its real nature, wouldn’t be mentioned again, then again
everything would have been all right, we would have found helpful
people everywhere again, even if we had forgotten the incident only
incompletely they would have understood, they’d have helped us to
forget it entirely. But instead we stayed at home. I don’t know what
we were waiting for, maybe for Amalia’s decision, for at the time of
the disaster, on that same morning, she had taken the reins as head
of the family and held them ﬁrmly, making no particular arrangements, giving no orders, making no requests, she did it almost
entirely through her silence alone. The rest of us, of course, had
much to discuss; we were whispering from morning to evening, and

sometimes my father called me to him in sudden alarm, and I spent
half the night at his bedside. Or sometimes we sat together, I and
Barnabas, who understood very little of the whole business and kept
passionately demanding explanations, always the same explanations;
he realized that the carefree years ahead of other boys of his age were
no longer for him, so we sat together, K., very much as you and I are
sitting now, and forgot that night was falling and morning coming
again. My mother was the feeblest of us all, probably because she
suﬀered not just our common aﬄiction but everyone’s separate
trouble too, and we were horriﬁed to see in her changes such as, we
guessed, were in store for our whole family. Her favourite place was
the corner of a sofa—we don’t have it any more, it is in Brunswick’s
big living-room—but she sat there and—well, we didn’t know
exactly what she was doing—she dozed or held long conversations
with herself, as the movement of her lips seemed to indicate. It was
only natural for us to keep discussing the business of the letter, looking at it this way and that in all its known details and unknown possibilities, and to compete constantly in thinking up ways to bring it
all to a happy conclusion. Yes, it was natural and inevitable, but not
a good idea; it plunged us ever more deeply into what we wanted to
escape. And what use were our ideas, however excellent? None of
them could have been put into practice without Amalia, they were all
just preliminaries, rendered pointless by the fact that they did not get
through to Amalia at all, and even if they had, would have met with
nothing but silence. Well, fortunately I understand Amalia better
now than I did then. She bore more than any of us, it is incredible
how much she has borne, and she still lives here with us today. Our
mother perhaps bore the aﬄiction of all of us, she bore it because she
suﬀered its full onslaught, and then she couldn’t bear it for long; it
can’t be said that she still bears it today, and even then her mind was
confused. But Amalia not only bore our aﬄiction, she also had the
lucidity of mind to see it for what it was; while we saw only the consequences she saw the reason; we hoped for some small means of
improvement, whatever it might be; she knew that all was decided,
we had to whisper, she had only to keep silent. She faced the truth
and lived, and bore her life then as she does now. How much
better oﬀ the rest of us are, for all our misery, than Amalia. We had
to leave our house, of course, and Brunswick moved in; we were
given this hovel and brought our belongings here on a handcart,

making several journeys. Barnabas and I pulled it, our father and
Amalia pushed at the back. Our mother, whom we had brought here
ﬁrst, was there to welcome us, sitting on a crate and moaning quietly
all the time. But I remember that we ourselves, during those laborious
journeys—which were also very humiliating, for we often met harvest carts with harvesters who fell silent and turned their faces away
as we passed—I remember that we, Barnabas and I, could not help
talking about our anxieties and plans even on those journeys, that we
sometimes stopped in mid-conversation and were reminded of our
duty only when our father hailed us. But none of our conversations
changed anything in our life, except that now we gradually began to
feel the eﬀects of want. Remittances from our relations stopped coming, our ﬁnancial means were almost used up, and at that of all times
the disdain for us as you have seen it began to be felt. People noticed
that we didn’t have the strength to work our way out of the letter
incident, and thought poorly of us for that; they didn’t underestimate our sad fate, but all the same they didn’t know just what it was
like. If we had overcome it they would have respected us for doing
so, but as we didn’t, they ﬁnally made a permanent ostracism out of
what had been only temporary before. They knew that in all likelihood they themselves would not have stood the test any better than
we did, but that just made it more necessary to cut oﬀ all contact with
us. Now they no longer spoke of us as human beings, our family
name was never mentioned, if they had to say something about us we
were merely called “the family of Barnabas”, who was the most
innocent of us all. Even this hovel fell into disrepute, and if you are
honest with yourself you will admit that you too thought you saw
how justiﬁed the general disdain was when you set foot here. Later,
when people sometimes came to see us again, they looked down their
noses at unimportant things, for instance that the little oil-lamp there
hung above the table. Where else would it hang if not over the table?
But to them it seemed intolerable. However, if we hung the lamp
anywhere else, they disliked that just as much. Everything we were,
everything we had, met with the same disdain.’

19
Petitioning
‘And what were we doing meanwhile? The worst thing we could
have done, something for which we might more rightly have been
despised than for our real oﬀence—we betrayed Amalia, we broke
with her rule of silence, we couldn’t go on living like that without any
hope at all, and we began petitioning or pestering the castle, each in
our own way, with demands for forgiveness. Of course we knew that
we were in no position to make good the damage, and we also knew
that the one link we had with the castle oﬀering any hope at all, the
link with Sortini, the oﬃcial who liked our father, was beyond our
reach because of what had happened, but all the same we set to work.
Our father began paying pointless visits to the village mayor, to the
secretaries, the attorneys, the clerks, who usually refused to see him,
and if by chance or cunning he made his way in after all—how we
rejoiced and gleefully rubbed our hands at such news—then he was
sent packing very quickly and never received again. It was only too
easy to answer him, everything was always so easy for the castle.
What did he want, they asked? What had happened to him? What did
he want forgiveness for? When had anyone in the castle raised so
much as a ﬁnger against him, and if someone had, who was it? He
was certainly impoverished, he had lost his customers, and so on, but
those were the accidents of everyday life, the vicissitudes of his trade
and the market, was the castle to take care of everything? It did in
fact take care of everything, but it couldn’t simply interfere in developments just like that, merely to serve the interests of a single man.
Was it supposed to send its oﬃcials running after our father’s customers and bringing them back to him by force? But, Father would
object—we discussed all these things in detail at home both before
and after he went, huddled in a corner as if hiding from Amalia, who
noticed it all but left us alone—but, our father would object, he
wasn’t complaining of his destitution, he could easily make good
everything he had lost, that was all just incidental, if only he were
forgiven. But what was he to be forgiven for? they replied, no one had
so far reported any wrongdoing of his, at least it wasn’t in the records,

or not in the records available to the attorneys, so consequently, and
as far as could be discovered, he had not been charged with anything,
and there were no proceedings in progress. Could he perhaps name
an oﬃcial order made against him? Father couldn’t. Or had there
been any intervention by an oﬃcial agency? Father didn’t know of
one. Well, if he didn’t know of any such thing, and nothing had happened, what did he want, then? What was there to forgive him? At
most, the way that he was now pestering the oﬃces to no good purpose, although that in itself was unforgivable. Our father did not
desist, he was still a strong man then, and the idleness forced upon
him left him plenty of time. ‘I will win Amalia’s honour back, it
won’t be long now,’ he told Barnabas and me several times a day, but
only very quietly, so that Amalia wasn’t able to hear it, even though
it was said only for Amalia’s sake, for in fact he wasn’t so much concerned with winning back her honour as with being forgiven. But to
be forgiven he must ﬁrst establish his guilt, and that very thing was
denied him in the oﬃces. He began thinking—and this showed that
his mind was already failing—that they were keeping his wrongdoing secret because he didn’t pay enough money. So far he had paid
only the standard taxes, and they were high enough, at least for
people in our position. But now he thought he ought to be paying
more, which was certainly wrong, in our oﬃces here they do take
bribes, for the sake of a quiet life and to avoid unnecessary talk, but
you never actually get anywhere that way. However, if that was
what Father hoped we weren’t going to upset him. We sold what we
still had—almost all of it was stuﬀ we really couldn’t spare—to get
our father the means for making his enquiries, and for a long time we
had the satisfaction every morning of knowing that when he set oﬀ
on his way at least he had a few coins in his pocket. We ourselves
went hungry all day, because the only thing we could still do by
getting money was to keep our father in a certain state of cheerful
hope. This, however, was not much of an advantage. On his way he
tormented himself, and a period that without the money would very
soon have come to the end it deserved was dragged out at length like
this. As there was really nothing much to be achieved in return for
the extra payments, sometimes a clerk would at least appear to be
doing something, promising to make enquiries, indicating that
certain clues had already been found, and they would be followed up
not as a duty but just as a favour to Father. And instead of doubting it

he became more and more credulous. He would bring one of these
obviously empty promises home as if he were restoring every blessing to our household, and it was painful to see him trying to make us
understand, always behind Amalia’s back, with a twisted smile and
widened eyes, pointing at Amalia, that as a result of his eﬀorts her
salvation, which would surprise no one more than Amalia herself,
was very close, but it was all still a secret and we mustn’t say a word.
And so it would surely have gone on much longer, if in the end we
had not been entirely unable to scrape up any more money for
Father. It is true that by now, after many pleas, Brunswick had taken
on Barnabas as an assistant, but only if he fetched the work to be
done under cover of dark in the evening, and once it was done
brought it back under cover of darkness too—it must be admitted
that Brunswick was running a certain risk to his business for our
sake, although in return he paid Barnabas very little, and Barnabas
does ﬂawless work—but his wages were only just enough to keep us
from starving to death. With great consideration for our father, and
after preparing him for it in all sorts of ways, we broke it to him that
we could no longer support him ﬁnancially, but he took it very
calmly. His mind was now unable to see how hopeless his eﬀorts
were, but he was worn out all the same by the constant disappointments. He did say—and he no longer spoke as clearly as before, but
this he said almost too distinctly—that he would have needed only a
very little more money, he’d been going to ﬁnd out everything today
or tomorrow, and now it was all in vain, we had failed only because
of the money, and so on and so forth, but the tone in which he said
it showed that he didn’t really believe it himself. And now he was
immediately, all of a sudden, making new plans. As he had not succeeded in proving that he was guilty of anything, and as a result
could not achieve anything in the oﬃcial line, he must turn exclusively to pleading and approach the oﬃcials in person. There must
be some among them who had kind and sympathetic hearts, to which
of course they could not give way in their work, but perhaps they
might show kindness outside oﬃce hours, if taken by surprise at the
right moment.’
Here K., who had so far been listening to Olga deep in thought,
interrupted her story by asking: ‘And you don’t think that was right?’
Of course the rest of the story would give him the answer, but he
wanted to know it at once.

‘No,’ said Olga, ‘there can be no question of sympathy or anything
of the kind. Young and inexperienced as we were, we knew that, and
so did our father, of course, but he had forgotten it just as he had
forgotten almost everything. His plan was to stand on the road close
to the castle, where the oﬃcials’ carriages drive by, and somehow or
other present his petition for forgiveness there. To be honest, it
made no sense at all, even if the impossible had happened and his
plea really had come to the ear of some oﬃcial. Can a single oﬃcial
forgive anyone? At the most, it must be a matter for the authorities
as a whole, but even the authorities as a whole probably can’t forgive,
they can only judge. But could an oﬃcial form an idea of the case
anyway from what our father, that poor, tired, ageing man, would
mutter to him, even if he were to get out of the carriage and put his
mind to the matter? The oﬃcials are very well educated, but only in
a one-sided way; in his own department, an oﬃcial will see a whole
train of ideas behind a single word, but you can spend hours on end
explaining matters from another department to him, and while he
may nod politely he doesn’t understand a bit of it. Of course that’s
all perfectly natural, you just have to think of the little oﬃcial matters
aﬀecting yourself, tiny things that an oﬃcial will deal with merely by
shrugging his shoulders, you just have to understand that thoroughly, and then you will have plenty to occupy your mind all your
life and never run out of ideas. But even if our father had reached an
oﬃcial responsible for our case, that oﬃcial could have done nothing
without the back ﬁles, particularly not on the road, he couldn’t forgive anything, he could only act as an oﬃcial, and to that end he
would merely point out the oﬃcial channels, but our father had
already failed entirely to achieve anything by going through those
channels. How far gone Father must have been to think that he could
get anywhere with this new plan! If any opportunity of that kind had
been even remotely possible, the road there by the castle would be
swarming with petitioners, but since it’s impossible, as the most
elementary education will show, there’s not a soul on the road.
Perhaps that encouraged our father in his hopes, for which he drew
nourishment from everywhere and anywhere. And he needed that
very much now; a sound mind must not let itself in for such lofty
considerations, it must clearly recognize impossibility in the most
superﬁcial aspects of the matter. When the oﬃcials drive to the village
or back to the castle, they are not going on a pleasure excursion, there

is work waiting for them both in the village and at the castle, that’s
why they drive so fast. Nor does it occur to them to look out of the
carriage window in search of petitioners standing outside, because
anyway their carriages are crammed full of ﬁles which they study as
they are driven along.’
‘Oh,’ said K., ‘but I’ve seen the inside of an oﬃcial sleigh that had
no ﬁles in it at all.’ Such a vast and incredible world was opened up
to him in Olga’s story that he couldn’t refrain from contributing his
own mite of experience, thereby convincing himself more clearly of
its existence as well as his own.
‘That may be so,’ said Olga, ‘but then it’s even worse. It means
that the oﬃcial has such important business that the ﬁles are too
valuable or too extensive to be taken with him, and then such oﬃcials
travel at a gallop. At least, they could have no time left for my father.
And what’s more, there are several ways to the castle. Sometimes one
is in fashion, and most of the oﬃcials drive that way, sometimes
another, and then that one gets crowded by traﬃc. No one has ever
yet discovered the rules governing that change. At times they will all
be driving along one road at eight in the morning, then half-an-hour
later they will all be on another road, ten minutes later they’ll be
using yet a third, then half-an-hour later they may go back to the ﬁrst
road and that road will be in use all day, but every moment there is
the possibility of a change. It’s a fact that all the ways from the castle
meet close to the village, but there all the carriages are racing along,
while their speed is a little more moderate close to the castle. And
just as the order in which the roads are used by the carriages is
irregular, and no one can work it out, so is the number of carriages.
There are often days when there’s not a carriage to be seen, and then
there will be crowds of them again. And just imagine our father facing all this. In his best suit, soon his only suit, he leaves the house
every morning, accompanied by our blessings and good wishes. He
takes with him a small ﬁre-brigade badge, which he was really wrong
to keep, and puts it on outside the village because he is afraid to wear
it in the village itself, even though it is so small that you can hardly
spot it two paces away, but our father really thinks it will mark him
out to the oﬃcials as they drive by. Not far from the entrance to the
castle there is a market garden belonging to a man called Bertuch*
who supplies the castle with vegetables, and our father chose a place
there on the narrow stone base of the garden fence. Bertuch allowed

it, because he used to be friends with our father, and was one of his
most faithful customers too; one of his feet is slightly crippled, and
he thought only Father could make him a boot to ﬁt it. So Father sat
there day after day; it was a gloomy, rainy autumn, but he didn’t
mind the weather; he had his hand on the doorknob at the appointed
time every morning and waved us goodbye, and in the evening he
came home wet through, stooping more every day, and ﬂung himself
down in a corner. At ﬁrst he told us about the little things that had
happened, for instance how out of pity and for old times’ sake
Bertuch had thrown a blanket over the fence for him, or how he
thought he had recognized this or that oﬃcial in a carriage driving
past, or again how a driver recognized him now and then, and ﬂicked
him lightly with the lash of his whip in jest. Later he stopped telling
us these things, obviously no longer hoping to achieve anything at all,
but he thought it his duty, his dreary vocation, to go up and spend the
day there. It was at this time that his rheumatic pains began, winter
was coming, snow fell, winter begins early here, well, so he sat there
sometimes on stones wet with rain, sometimes in the snow. At night
he groaned with pain, in the morning he sometimes wasn’t sure
whether he ought to go out, but he overcame his feelings and went
anyway. Our mother clung to him and didn’t want to let him go, and
he, probably afraid that his limbs would no longer obey him, allowed
her to go with him, and so she became a martyr to the pain too. We
were often there with them, we took them food, or just went to see
them or try to persuade them to come home—how often we found
them there, huddled together on their narrow perch with a thin blanket over them, hardly covering them, and nothing around but the
grey of snow and mist far and wide, with not a human being or a carriage to be seen all day long! Oh, what a sight, K., what a sight! Until
one morning our father couldn’t get his stiﬀ legs out of bed any
more. He was in despair, in a fevered fantasy he thought he saw a
carriage stopping at Bertuch’s market garden at that very moment,
an oﬃcial getting out, looking along the fence for our father, and
then, shaking his head with an angry expression, getting back
into the carriage again. At that our father uttered such cries that it
was as if he wanted to attract the oﬃcial’s attention all the way oﬀ up
there, explaining how he couldn’t help his absence. And it was a long
absence, for he never went there again. He had to stay in bed for weeks.
Amalia took over his care and nursing, his treatment, everything,

and she has done the same until this day with only a few breaks.
She knows about healing herbs to soothe his pain, she hardly needs
any sleep, she is never alarmed, fears nothing, is never impatient, she
did all the work for our parents. And while we, unable to do anything
to help, hovered around ineﬀectually, she remained cool and calm in
every way. But when the worst was over, and Father could make his
way out of bed again, cautiously and supported on both sides, Amalia
immediately withdrew and left him to us.’

20
Olga’s Plans
‘Now we had to ﬁnd some occupation for our father that he could
still manage, something that would at least keep him believing that it
helped to lift the blame from our family. Finding anything like that
was not easy, basically everything I thought of was about as useful as
sitting outside Bertuch’s market garden, but I did hit upon something that gave even me a little hope. Whenever there had been talk
in the oﬃces or among the clerks or elsewhere about our guilt, only
the insult to Sortini’s messenger had ever been mentioned, and no
one dared go any further into it. Well, I said to myself, if public
opinion, even if only on the surface, seems to know only about the
insult to the messenger, everything could be put right, again even if
only on the surface, if we could make things up with the messenger
himself. No complaint has been made, they explain, so no oﬃce is
looking into the case, and therefore the messenger is free to be reconciled with us for his own part, and that’s what it’s all about. None
of this could have any crucial signiﬁcance, it was just for show and
could lead to nothing more, but it would please our father, and perhaps the many seekers after information who had pestered him so
much could be driven into a corner, which would be very satisfying
to him. First, of course, the messenger must be found. When I told
our father about my plan he was very angry at ﬁrst—for he had
always been extremely self-willed—partly because he thought, and
this notion had developed during his illness, that we had prevented
his ultimate success all along, ﬁrst by stopping our ﬁnancial support
and then by keeping him in bed, and partly because he was no longer
entirely able to take in new ideas. I hadn’t ﬁnished telling him everything before he had rejected my plan; as he saw it, he ought to go on
waiting outside Bertuch’s market garden and, since he was certainly
in no state to go up there daily by himself, we must take him in the
handcart. But I persisted, and gradually he came to terms with the
idea. What upset him was just that in this he must rely entirely on
me, for only I had seen the messenger, and Father didn’t know him.
To be sure, any one of the castle servants is much like any other, and

even I couldn’t be absolutely certain that I would know this one
again. So we began going to the Castle Inn and looking around
among the servants there. The man had been a servant of Sortini,
and Sortini didn’t come into the village any more, but the gentlemen
often chopped and changed servants, we might well ﬁnd him in the
group serving another gentleman, and if we couldn’t ﬁnd Sortini’s
messenger himself, then we might get news of him from the others.
But to do that we would have to go to the Castle Inn every evening,
and we were not welcome anywhere, certainly not in a place like that.
And we couldn’t ﬁgure as paying customers. However, it turned out
that we could be useful there after all; you probably know how the
servants pestered Frieda. Most of them are quiet enough in themselves, but spoilt and made slow-witted by having only light work to
do. “May you be as well oﬀ as a servant,” say the oﬃcials when wishing each other well, and sure enough, so far as living well goes, the
servants are the real masters in the castle. They appreciate that too,
and are quiet and digniﬁed in the castle itself, where they live by its
rules, as I have been assured many times. Down here too we ﬁnd
traces of that attitude among the servants, but only traces, because
otherwise it’s as if they were transformed by the fact that the castle
regulations don’t apply to them so much here in the village, where
they are a wild, unruly set, ruled not by the castle regulations but by
their own insatiable desires. Their shameless conduct knows no
bounds, and it’s lucky for the village that they may leave the Castle
Inn only when they’re told to. However, in the Castle Inn itself we
have to try to get along with them; Frieda found that very diﬃcult,
so she was extremely glad to turn to me to calm the servants down.
I’ve been spending the night with the servants in the stables at least
twice a week for more than two years. Earlier, when Father could still
get to the Castle Inn with me, he would sleep somewhere in the bar,
waiting for me to bring him any news early in the morning. There
wasn’t much of it. To this day we haven’t found the messenger concerned, although he’s said to be still in the service of Sortini, who
thinks very highly of him, and when Sortini withdrew to more
remote oﬃces they say he went too. In general the servants have gone
as long as us without seeing him, and if one of them does claim to
have seen him it’s probably a mistake. So my plan was likely to fail,
and even if it hasn’t failed entirely we haven’t found the messenger,
and unfortunately my father was ﬁnished oﬀ by walking to the Castle

Inn and spending the night there—and perhaps even by his sympathy for me, in so far as he is still capable of it—and he has been in
the condition in which you’ve seen him for almost two years,
although perhaps he is better oﬀ than my mother, whose death we
expect any day now. Only Amalia’s superhuman eﬀorts keep it at
bay. But what I have managed to do at the Castle Inn is to establish
a certain connection with the castle; please don’t despise me when I
say that I am not sorry for what I did. You will perhaps be thinking,
what kind of close connection with the castle may that be? And you
are right, it is not a close connection. I do know many of the servants
now, the servants of almost all the gentlemen who have come to the
village over the last few years, and if I were ever to get into the castle
I wouldn’t feel I was a stranger there. To be sure, I know the servants
only as they are in the village; in the castle they are quite diﬀerent
and probably don’t deign to recognize anyone, certainly not someone
they’ve consorted with in the village, even if they have sworn a hundred times in the stable that they’d be very glad to see me again at the
castle. I have enough experience to know how little such promises
mean. But that’s not the main point. It’s not only through the servants themselves that I have a connection with the castle; it may be
the case, and I hope it is, that someone up there is observing me and
what I do—and the administration of such a large body of servants
must be a very important, onerous part of the oﬃcial work—and
whoever is watching me from up there may judge me more leniently
than others do. Perhaps he realizes that I am ﬁghting for our family
and continuing our father’s eﬀorts, if only in rather a pathetic way.
If you look at it like that, then perhaps I will also be forgiven for taking money from the servants and using it for our family. And I have
achieved something else as well, although perhaps you will be
another who blames me for it. I have heard a great deal from the
servants about how people can get into the service of the castle without going through the tedious process of public acceptance, which
can last years. Then they are not oﬃcially acknowledged employees,
but they work under cover and are semi-oﬃcial. They have neither
rights nor duties, and the fact that they have no duties is the worst of
it, but they do have one advantage, they are close to everything, they
can spot good opportunities and use them. You are not an employee
if you are one of them, but you may ﬁnd some work by chance if there’s
no employee ready to hand, someone calls, you come hurrying up,

and now you are employed, which you weren’t a moment before. But
when does such an opportunity arise? Sometimes quickly, you have
hardly arrived, you have hardly looked around you when the opportunity comes, not everyone has the presence of mind to take it at
once, but then again it may not come for more years than the procedure of public acceptance takes, and such a semi-oﬃcial employee
cannot be publicly acknowledged in the regular sense. There is
plenty to think about here, but no one mentions the fact that very
meticulous selection is involved in the process of public acceptance,
and any member of a family that seems disreputable in some way or
another is ruled out from the ﬁrst, suppose such a person applies. He
may be on tenterhooks for years anticipating the result, and from the
ﬁrst day everyone has been asking him in amazement how he can
embark on such a hopeless venture, but he still has hope, how else
could he live? Then, after many years, perhaps in old age, he learns
of his rejection, he learns that all is lost and his life has been in vain.
Here again, of course, there are exceptions, so it is easy to fall prey to
temptation. It can happen that even disreputable people are ﬁnally
accepted, there are oﬃcials who like the scent of such game, positively against their will, and then during the acceptance tests they
sniﬀ the air, they twist their mouths, they roll their eyes; in some way
such a man seems to them extraordinarily appetizing, and they have
to stick resolutely to the guidelines in the legal books to resist him.
Sometimes, however, that helps the man not to acceptance but to an
endlessly protracted acceptance procedure, one that will never come
to an end at all, but will be cut short only by his death. So both legal
acceptance and the other kind are full of diﬃculties both overt and
covert, and before you let yourself in for anything of that nature it is
highly advisable to weigh up the pros and cons carefully. And
Barnabas and I did not fail to do so. Whenever I came back from the
Castle Inn, we sat down together and I told him the latest news of
what I had learnt. We discussed it for days, and Barnabas neglected
the work he was doing more often than he should. And here, as you
see it, I may be to blame. For I knew that we couldn’t rely much on
the stories the servants told. I knew that they never wanted to talk to
me about the castle, they were always changing the subject, I had to
wheedle every word out of them, and then when they did get going
they let rip, talked nonsense, boasted, outdid each other in exaggerations and inventions, so that obviously in all that shouting, each

vying with the other in the darkness of the stable, there might be at
best some few indications of the truth. However, I passed it all on to
Barnabas, just as I had memorized it, and he, who was still unable to
distinguish between truth and lies, and as a result of our family’s
situation was almost dying of longing for these things, he drank it all
in and was eager for more. And it was on Barnabas that my new plan
depended. There was no more to be had from the servants. Sortini’s
messenger could not be found, and never would be, Sortini seemed
to withdraw ever further, and with him so did the messenger. Even
their appearance and Sortini’s name often seemed to be lapsing into
oblivion, and I had to describe them at length, achieving nothing
except that, with some diﬃculty, people did remember them but
could say nothing beyond that. And as for my life with the servants,
naturally I had no inﬂuence on how it was judged, I could only hope
that it would be taken as it was meant and that a little of the guilt
would be lifted from our family, but I saw no sign of that. Yet I stuck
to it, since I saw no other opportunity of doing something for us at
the castle. For Barnabas, however, I did see such an opportunity. If
I felt like it, and I felt like it very much indeed, I could gather from
the servants’ stories that a man taken into the service of the castle can
do a great deal for his family. Although how much of those stories
was credible? It was impossible to ﬁnd out, but it was clear that it
would really be very little. If, for instance, a servant whom I would
never see again, or whom I would hardly recognize if I did see him
again, assured me solemnly that he could help my brother ﬁnd a job
in the castle, or at least give Barnabas some support if he could get
into the castle somehow or other, for instance by providing him with
refreshment, since according to the servants’ stories it appears that
applicants for posts can fall down in a faint or become mentally confused while they wait, and then they are lost if they have no friends
to care for them—if I was told such things and more, they were
probably well-justiﬁed warnings, while the promises that went with
them were entirely empty. Not to Barnabas, however, although I
warned him against believing them, but the fact that I told him the
stories was enough to win him over for my plans. What I said to him
myself had little inﬂuence on him, he was inﬂuenced mainly by the
servants’ stories. And so I was really thrown entirely on my own
resources; no one could communicate with our parents but Amalia,
and the more I followed my father’s old plans in my own way, the

more Amalia cut herself oﬀ from me. She will speak to me in front of
you or other people, but never now when we are alone; I was only a
toy to the servants at the Castle Inn, one that they furiously tried to
break, I never spoke a single word with any of them in friendship for
two years, it was all underhand or lies or false, so I was left with only
Barnabas, and Barnabas was still very young. When I told my stories
and saw the gleam in his eyes—it is there to this day—I was alarmed,
but I didn’t give up; there seemed to be too much at stake. To be
sure, I did not have my father’s grand if empty plans, I did not have
a man’s determination, my idea was still to make up for the insult to
the messenger, and I even thought this modest wish of mine might
be considered meritorious. But what I alone had failed to do, I now
hoped to achieve in a diﬀerent way and more securely through
Barnabas. We had insulted a messenger and chased him out of the
oﬃces at the front of the castle; what was more obvious than to oﬀer
the castle a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, so that
Barnabas could do the work of the messenger who had suﬀered the
insult, thus making it possible for him, the messenger, to stay away
with an easy mind for as long as he liked, for however long he needed
to forget the insult? I did realize that for all the modest nature of this
plan there was also presumption in it; it could give the impression
that we were dictating to the authorities, telling them how to manage
their own staﬀ, or make it look as if we doubted whether the authorities were able to make arrangements for the best of their own accord,
or had been doing so long before we even thought of lending them a
hand. But then again I thought it was impossible for the authorities
to misunderstand me like that, or if they did they would do it on
purpose, and then all I did would be rejected from the outset, without more thought. So I persisted, and Barnabas’s ambition did the
rest. In this time of preparation, Barnabas became so grand in his
ideas that he thought shoemaking too dirty a job for someone who
was to be an oﬃce employee, he even dared to contradict Amalia
when she said something to him, which was rare enough, and indeed
he contradicted her outright. I did not begrudge him this brief pleasure, for on the ﬁrst day when he went to the castle, as could easily
have been foreseen, there was an end to our joy and grand ideas. And
now he began that apparent service which I have already told you
about. The way Barnabas ﬁrst set foot in the castle, or more correctly
in that oﬃce which has, so to speak, become his place of work,

without any diﬃculty was astonishing. This success almost turned
my wits at the time, and when Barnabas whispered his news to me
on coming home I ran to Amalia, seized her, led her into a corner,
and kissed her ﬁercely, with my lips and teeth and all, so that she
wept with pain and fright. I couldn’t speak for excitement, and it was
so long since we had talked to each other anyway, I thought I would
put it oﬀ for a few days. But there was no more to tell over the next
few days. We got no further than that ﬁrst achievement. For two
years Barnabas led the same monotonous, oppressive life. The servants failed me entirely; I gave Barnabas a little letter to take with him,
in which I recommended him to their attention, at the same time
reminding them of their promise, and whenever Barnabas saw one of
the servants he took out the letter and showed it to him. Sometimes
he came upon servants who didn’t know me, and his way of showing
the letter in silence, because he dared not speak up there, probably
annoyed even those who did, yet it was a shame that no one helped
him. Release came in a way that we ourselves could and should have
thought of long before, when one servant, on whom the letter had
probably been pressed several times, crumpled it up and threw it into
a waste-paper basket. He might have been saying, it occurred to me:
“Well, that’s only the way you treat letters yourselves.” Unsuccessful
as this whole period was otherwise, however, it had a beneﬁcial eﬀect
on Barnabas, if you can call it beneﬁcial that he aged before his time,
became a man before his time, and in many ways is more grave and
understanding than most grown men. That often makes me look at
him very sadly, comparing him with the boy he still was two years
ago. And yet I do not have the comfort and support that, as a man,
he might be able to provide. Without me he would hardly have got
into the castle at all, but now that he is there he is independent of me.
I am his one close friend, but I am sure he tells me only a small part
of what is on his mind. He tells me a great deal about the castle, but
from his stories, from the little things he does tell me, it’s hard to
understand how it can have changed him so. In particular, it’s hard
to understand why, when he was so brave as a boy, almost driving us
to despair, he has now so entirely lost his courage as a man up there.
To be sure, all that pointless standing about and waiting day after
day, always starting all over again without any prospect of change,
will wear a man down and make him doubtful, and ultimately incapable of anything but that despairing standing about. But why didn’t

he put up any resistance even at the start? Particularly since he
soon realized that I had been right, and there was nothing there to
satisfy his ambition, though there might be some prospect of
improving our family’s situation. For everything is in a very low key
there, except for the whims of the servants, ambition seeks its satisfaction in work up there, and as the work itself is what matters
ambition is lost entirely, there is no room there for childish wishes.
But Barnabas thought, as he told me, that he saw clearly how great
was the power and knowledge of even those very dubious oﬃcials
into whose room he was allowed. How they dictated, fast, with eyes
half-closed, brief gestures, how they handled the morose servants
just by crooking a foreﬁnger, without a word—and at such moments
the servants, breathing heavily, smiled happily—or how they found
an important place in their books, struck the page ostentatiously,
and then, so far as was possible in the cramped space, the others
came hurrying up and craned their necks to look. That and similar
things gave Barnabas great ideas of these men, and he had the
impression that if he ever rose so high as to be noticed by them, and
was able to exchange a few words with them, not as a stranger but
as a colleague in the oﬃce, although one of the most junior rank,
then he could do all sorts of things for our family. But it’s never
come to that yet, and Barnabas dares not do anything that might
bring him within reach of it, although he knows very well that,
in spite of his youth, he himself has moved into the responsible position of head of the family on account of the unfortunate circumstances. And now for the last of my confessions; you came here a
week ago, I heard someone at the Castle Inn mention it, but took no
notice; a land surveyor had arrived—well, I didn’t even know what
a land surveyor was. However, next evening Barnabas—whom I
usually go a little way to meet at a certain time—comes home
earlier than usual, sees Amalia in the living-room, and so takes me
out into the road, where he puts his face against my shoulder and
weeps for minutes on end. He is the little boy of the old days again.
Something has happened that is more than he can deal with. It’s
as if a whole new world had suddenly opened up before him, and he
cannot bear the happiness and the anxiety of all that novelty. Yet
nothing has really happened except that he has been given a letter to
you to deliver. But it is the ﬁrst letter, the ﬁrst job of work, that he
has ever been given.’

Here Olga stopped short. All was quiet except for the heavy and
sometimes stertorous breathing of her parents. K. simply said, in a
non-committal tone, as if expanding Olga’s story: ‘So you’ve all been
pretending to me. Barnabas brought me the letter, acting like a busy,
experienced messenger, and both you yourself and Amalia, who was
obviously in league with you and Barnabas this time, made out that
his work as a messenger and the letters themselves were nothing
much to speak of.’ ‘You must distinguish between us,’ said Olga.
‘Those two letters made Barnabas a happy child again, in spite of all
his doubts about what he is doing. He entertains those doubts only
so far as he and I are concerned; in your case his honour requires him
to ﬁgure as a real messenger, just like his own idea of real messengers.
For instance, although his hopes of getting an oﬃcial suit are now
rising, within two hours I had to alter his trousers so that they would
at least look like the close-ﬁtting trousers worn by the castle employees, and as of course it’s easy to deceive you in such things, he can
hold his own in front of you. That’s just like Barnabas. Amalia, however, really does despise his work as a messenger, and now that he
seems to be having a little success, as she can easily tell from the way
Barnabas and I sit together whispering, she despises it even more.
She is speaking the truth, never let yourself be so far deceived as to
doubt that. But if I have sometimes belittled the work of a messenger, K., it was not with any intention of deceiving you, it was out of
fear. Those two letters brought by Barnabas are the only sign of
grace, doubtful as it may be, that our family has had in three years.
This turn in our fortunes, if it really is a turn in our fortunes and not
another deception—for deceptions are more common than such a
happy turn of events—is connected with your arrival here, and our
fate now depends on you to some extent. Perhaps those two letters
are just a start, and Barnabas’s activities will extend far beyond
carrying messages to you—we’ll hope for that as long as we can—but
for the time being it all points to you. As for the castle up there, we
must content ourselves with what they give us, but down here we
may perhaps be able to do something ourselves, that’s to say make
sure of your favour, or at least preserve ourselves from your dislike,
or, and this is the main point, protect you as far as our powers and
experience allow, so that you don’t lose your connection with the
castle, which might be a lifeline to us too. But how best to do that?
How to ensure that you would have no suspicion of us when we

approach you, because you’re a stranger here and so you nurture
certain well-justiﬁed suspicions of everyone? In addition we are generally disdained, and you are inﬂuenced by the general opinion,
particularly your ﬁancée’s, so how can we approach you without, for
instance, being at odds with your ﬁancée even if we didn’t intend it,
and thus hurting your feelings? And the messages, which I read
closely before you got them—Barnabas hasn’t read them, as a messenger he isn’t allowed to—at ﬁrst sight they don’t seem very important, they’re old, they diminished any importance of their own by
referring you to the village mayor. How are we to behave to you in
view of that? If we made much of their importance, we’d be suspect
for overestimating something so obviously unimportant, vaunting
our merits as the ones who brought those messages to you, pursuing
our own ends and not yours. Why, in that way we could belittle the
messages themselves in your eyes and deceive you, which is the last
thing we want to do. But if we suggest that the messages aren’t very
important then we’re suspect too, because why in that case would we
bother about delivering these unimportant letters, why would our
actions and our words contradict each other, why would we deceive
not only you, to whom they are addressed, but our employer, who
certainly didn’t give us the letters to have our explanations devalue
them in the eyes of the person who received them? And treading the
middle line between these extremes, I mean assessing the letters correctly, is impossible because they keep changing their own value,
they give rise to endless considerations, and only chance decides
where we stop, that’s to say, opinion is a matter of chance. Then
bring our fear of you into it as well, oh, it all gets so confused, and
you mustn’t judge what I say too severely. For instance, if as it happened Barnabas came home with the news that you weren’t satisﬁed
with his work as a messenger, and in his ﬁrst alarm, unfortunately
showing something of a messenger’s sensitivity, oﬀered to resign, I’d
be in a position to retrieve his mistake by practising deception, by
telling lies, by betrayal, anything bad so long as it will help. Yet then
I’d be doing it, or at least I think I would, as much for your sake as
for ours.’
There was a knock. Olga went to the door and opened it. A strip
of light fell into the darkness from a dark lantern. The late visitor
asked whispered questions and was given whispered answers, but he
wasn’t satisﬁed with that, and tried coming into the room. It seemed

that Olga couldn’t stop him, so she called Amalia, obviously hoping
that to protect her parents’ sound sleep Amalia would do all in her
power to make the visitor go away. Sure enough she came hurrying
up, pushed Olga aside, stepped out into the road, and closed the door
behind her. It took her only a minute, and she was back as soon as
she had done what Olga couldn’t.
K. then heard from Olga that the visitor had come about him; it
had been one of the assistants looking for him on behalf of Frieda.
Olga had wanted to protect K. from the attentions of the assistants;
if K. was going to tell Frieda about his visit here later, then well and
good, but it ought not to be the assistants who found out that he had
been to see them, as K. agreed. However, he declined Olga’s suggestion that he might stay the night here and wait for Barnabas; so far as
he was concerned he might have accepted, for it was late, and it
seemed to him that now, whether he liked it or not, he was so bound
to this family that even if it might be awkward for other reasons,
staying the night here was the most natural thing in the world for
him because of the bond between them. However, he still declined,
made uneasy by the assistant’s visit; he could not understand how
Frieda, who knew his mind, and the assistants, who had learnt to fear
him, were now so much in league again that Frieda didn’t shrink
from sending one of the assistants to ﬁnd him, and only one at that.
The other must have stayed with her. He asked Olga if she had a
whip; she did not, but she had a good willow switch, which he took.
Then he asked if there was another way out of this house. Yes, there
was a second way out through the yard, only you had to climb over
the garden fence and go through the garden next door before you
came to the road. K. decided to do that. While Olga showed him the
way across the yard to the fence, K. quickly tried to calm her fears,
saying that he was not at all angry with her for giving the story her
own little twist, but understood her very well, he thanked her for the
conﬁdence in him that she had shown, and proved by telling her
story, and told her to send Barnabas to the school as soon as he came
home, even if it was still night. It was true that the messages brought
by Barnabas were not his only hope, or he would be in a bad way, but
he certainly didn’t want to try coping without them, he wanted to
keep a good hold on them, but at the same time he wasn’t going to
forget Olga, for with her courage, her circumspection, her clever
mind, and the way she sacriﬁced herself for her family, Olga herself

was almost more important to him than the messages. If he had to
choose between Olga and Amalia, it wouldn’t take him much thought
to make the choice. And he pressed her hand with heartfelt emotion
as he swung himself up on the fence of the garden next door.
When he was out in the road, as far as the gloomy night would
allow he could still see the assistant further along it, pacing up and
down outside Barnabas’s house. Sometimes he stopped and tried
shining his lantern into the living-room through the curtained
window. K. called out to him, and without visibly taking alarm he
stopped spying on the house and came towards K. ‘Who are you
looking for?’ asked K., testing the ﬂexibility of the willow switch
against his thigh. ‘You,’ said the assistant, coming closer. ‘But who
are you?’ asked K. suddenly, for it didn’t seem to be the assistant
after all. He seemed older, wearier, his face fuller but more lined,
and the way he walked was quite diﬀerent from the jaunty bearing of
the assistants, who looked as if their joints were galvanized. He
walked slowly, limping slightly, with a pernickety and sickly air.
‘Don’t you know me?’ asked the man. ‘Why, I’m Jeremias, your
former assistant.’ ‘You are?’ said K., showing a small length of the
willow switch that he had been hiding behind his back. ‘But you look
quite diﬀerent.’ ‘That’s because I’m alone,’ said Jeremias. ‘When I’m
on my own my cheerful youthfulness is all gone.’ ‘Where’s Artur,
then?’ asked K. ‘Artur?’ said Jeremias. ‘Your little favourite? He’s left
your service. You were rather too harsh with us, and he couldn’t put
up with it, poor sensitive soul. He’s gone back to the castle to complain of you.’ ‘And what about you?’ asked K. ‘It was ﬁne for me to
stay,’ said Jeremias. ‘Artur is complaining on my behalf too.’ ‘What
are the pair of you complaining about?’ asked K. ‘We’re complaining,’
said Jeremias, ‘that you can’t take a joke. And what have we done?
Cracked a few jokes, laughed a bit, teased your ﬁancée a little. And all
of it, by the way, done to order. When Galater sent us to you—’
‘Galater?’ asked K. ‘Yes, Galater,’ said Jeremias. ‘He was deputizing
for Klamm at the time. When he sent us to you he said—I took particular note of it, because that’s what we refer to in our complaint—you
two are going to be the land surveyor’s assistants, he said. What, we
said, us? We don’t know the ﬁrst thing about that kind of work. To
which he said: that’s not the point; if necessary he’ll teach you. But
the main thing is that I want you to cheer him up a little. I hear he
takes everything very hard. He’s come to the village, and to him this

is a great event, whereas in fact it’s nothing at all, and you’re going
to show him that.’ ‘Well,’ said K., ‘Galater was right there—and did
you carry out your task?’ ‘I don’t know,’ said Jeremias. ‘It wasn’t
possible in such a short time. All I know is that you were very rough
with us, and that’s what we’re complaining of. I really don’t understand how you, only an employee here, and not even employed by
the castle, can’t see that service of that kind is very hard work, and
it’s extremely unfair to make a man’s work hard for him in such a
wilful, almost childish way as you did. Your callous attitude in leaving us freezing outside by the fence, the way you almost struck Artur
dead—and he’s a sensitive soul who feels pain for days after so much
as a cross word—when you brought your ﬁst down on the mattress
where he lay like that, the way you hunted me all over the place in
the snow in the afternoon—why, I needed an hour to recover! I’m
not as young as I was!’ ‘My dear Jeremias,’ said K., ‘you’re perfectly
right, only you should be saying all this to Galater. It was his own
idea to send you to me, I never asked him to do it. And as I never
asked for you, I was justiﬁed in sending you back again, and I would
rather have done it peaceably than by force, but you obviously
wouldn’t have that. Why didn’t you come to me at once and speak
about it as openly as you do now?’ ‘Because I was on duty, of course,’
said Jeremias. ‘That goes without saying.’ ‘And you’re not on duty
now?’ asked K. ‘Not any more,’ said Jeremias. ‘Artur has given in our
notice at the castle, or at least the procedure that will ﬁnally take us
oﬀ the job is in progress.’ ‘But you still come in search of me as if you
were on duty,’ said K. ‘No,’ said Jeremias, ‘I came in search of you
only to set Frieda’s mind at rest. When you left her for those girls,
Barnabas’s sisters, she was very unhappy, not so much because of her
loss as because of your betrayal, but then again she’d seen it coming
long ago, and it had made her suﬀer severely. I went back to the
school window to see if by any chance you’d come back to your
senses. But you weren’t there, I saw only Frieda sitting on a school
bench crying. So I went in to see her and we came to an agreement.
I’m going to be room-service waiter at the Castle Inn, at least until
my business at the castle is cleared up, and Frieda will be back
behind the bar. That’s better for her. There was no sense in marrying you, not for Frieda. What’s more, you didn’t appreciate the sacriﬁce she was making for you. And now, good soul, she is still
wondering sometimes whether she hasn’t done you wrong, whether

perhaps you weren’t with Barnabas’s sisters after all. But of course
there could be no doubt where you were, I went to ﬁnd out once and
for all, because after all that agitation Frieda deserves a good night’s
rest, and so do I. So I went, and not only did I ﬁnd you, I could see
that those girls were doing just as you wanted like puppets on a
string. Especially the brunette*—oh, she’s a real wild-cat, the way
she spoke up for you. Well, each to his own taste. Anyway, you
didn’t have to go taking the long way round through the garden next
door, because I know it myself.’

21
So what could have been foreseen but not prevented had happened.
Frieda had left him. That needn’t necessarily be ﬁnal; it wasn’t as
bad as all that, Frieda could be won back. She was easily inﬂuenced
by strangers and deﬁnitely by those assistants, who thought that
Frieda was in the same situation as they were, and that now they had
given in their notice Frieda must do the same. But K. had only to
appear in person, remind her of all the points in his favour, and she
would be remorseful and go back to him, particularly if he could
justify his visit to the girls by showing her that he had succeeded in
something, and owed it to them. However, although he tried to
reassure himself with these reﬂections when he thought of Frieda,
he was not in fact reassured. Only a little while ago he had praised
Frieda to Olga, saying that she was his only prop and stay, but she was
not a very steady prop and stay; it did not take some powerful man to
intervene and rob him of Frieda, only that not very appetizing assistant,
a specimen of humanity who sometimes gave the impression of not
being properly alive.
Jeremias had already begun moving away, and K. called him back.
‘Jeremias,’ he said, ‘I will be perfectly open with you, so please
answer one question honestly yourself. We aren’t master and servant
any more, and you are not the only one to be glad of it, so am I, which
means we have no reason to deceive each other. Here before your
eyes I break the switch I had intended for you; I took the way
through the garden not for fear of you but to take you by surprise and
give you a taste of the switch. Well, don’t bear me a grudge, that’s all
over now. If the authorities hadn’t forced you to be my servant, if
you’d only been an acquaintance of mine, I am sure we would have
got on very well, even if your appearance does bother me a little at
times. And now we can make up for our omissions in that respect.’
‘Do you think so?’ said the assistant, rubbing his tired eyes and
yawning. ‘I could explain the whole thing to you in more detail, but
I don’t have the time, I must go to Frieda, the child’s waiting for me.
She hasn’t gone back to work yet—she wanted to immerse herself
in work at once, probably to forget you, but I persuaded the landlord

to give her a little time to recover, and we will at least spend that
time together. As for your idea, I certainly have no reason to lie to
you, but I have no reason to conﬁde in you either. I’m not the same
as you, you see. As long as I was your servant of course you were a
very important person to me, not on account of your own qualities
but because of my job as a servant, and I would have done anything
you wanted, but now you are a matter of indiﬀerence to me. I’m not
touched by your breaking that switch either; it only reminds me what
a rough master I had, so it’s no use trying to win me over that way.’
‘You speak to me like that,’ said K., ‘as if you were perfectly certain you’d never have anything to fear from me again. But that isn’t
the case. You’re probably not free of me yet, things aren’t done at
such speed here—’ ‘Sometimes they’re done even faster,’ protested
Jeremias. ‘Sometimes,’ said K., ‘but there’s nothing to suggest that
this is one of those times. At least, neither you nor I have written
notice of the termination of your job in our hands. So the procedure
is only just starting, and I haven’t yet intervened through my own
connections, but I will. If the outcome is not in your favour, well, you
didn’t do much beforehand to ingratiate yourself with your master,
and I may even have been over-hasty in breaking that willow switch.
And you may be puﬀed up with pride after stealing Frieda from me,
but in spite of the respect I feel for your person, even if you feel none
for mine any more, I know that if I say a few words to Frieda they
will be enough to tear apart the web of lies you wove to catch her. For
only lies could turn Frieda against me.’ ‘Those threats don’t alarm
me,’ said Jeremias. ‘You don’t want me as an assistant, you’re afraid
of me as an assistant, you’re afraid of assistants in general, it was only
out of fear that you hit that good soul Artur.’ ‘Maybe,’ said K., ‘but
did it hurt him any less because of that? Perhaps I’ll get many similar
chances yet to show how afraid I am of you. I see that you don’t enjoy
being an assistant, and for my part I really enjoy forcing you to be
one, never mind any fear of you I may have. In fact I shall be quite
pleased to have you as my assistant on your own this time, without
Artur. Then I can devote more attention to you.’ ‘Do you think,’ said
Jeremias, ‘that I’m in the least afraid of all that?’ ‘Well,’ said K.,
‘you’re certainly a little afraid, and if you have any sense you’re very
afraid. Why else haven’t you gone to Frieda already? Tell me, do you
love her?’ ‘Love?’ said Jeremias. ‘She’s a good, clever girl, a former
lover of Klamm’s, which makes her someone to be respected anyway.

And if she keeps begging me to free her from you, why shouldn’t
I do her the favour? Particularly as I’m not even doing you any harm,
now that you’ve found consolation with Barnabas’s wretched sisters.’
‘Now I see your fear,’ said K., ‘and a pitiful fear it is too. You’re trying to entangle me in your lies. Frieda asked me for just one thing, to
set her free from my servile, lascivious assistants who had run so
wild. Unfortunately I didn’t have time to ﬁnish doing as she asked,
and now I see the consequences of omitting to do so.’
‘Mr Land Surveyor, sir! Mr Land Surveyor!’ someone shouted
down the road. It was Barnabas. He arrived out of breath, but didn’t
forget to bow to K. ‘I’ve succeeded,’ he said. ‘Succeeded in what?’
asked K. ‘You mean you’ve delivered my request to Klamm?’ ‘Not
that, no,’ said Barnabas. ‘I tried hard, but it just couldn’t be done. I
pushed my way to the front, I stood there all day uninvited, so close
to the lectern that once a clerk actually pushed me aside because I
was standing in his light, I tried to attract attention, which is strictly
forbidden, by raising my hand when Klamm looked up, I stayed in
the oﬃce longer than anyone. In the end I was alone there with the
servants, and then I had the pleasure of seeing Klamm come back
again, but it wasn’t because of me, he just wanted to look something
up in a book, and then he left directly. At last, as I still didn’t move,
a servant practically swept me out of the doorway with his broom.
I’m telling you all this to make sure you aren’t dissatisﬁed with what
I’ve done again.’ ‘What use is all your industry to me, Barnabas,’ said
K., ‘if you weren’t successful?’ ‘Oh, but I was successful,’ said
Barnabas. ‘When I left my oﬃce—well, I call it my oﬃce—I saw a
gentleman coming slowly along, apparently from the corridors further inside the building. Otherwise the place was empty, it was
already very late. I decided to wait for him; it was a ﬁne opportunity
to stay there, in fact I felt like staying there for ever rather than having to bring you bad news. But it was worth waiting for the gentleman anyway, because he was Erlanger.* Don’t you know him? He’s
one of Klamm’s principal secretaries. A slight little gentleman with a
bit of a limp. He recognized me at once, he’s famous for his memory
and his knowledge of human nature; he simply frowns and that’s
enough for him to recognize anyone, often including people he’s
never met before, people he’s only heard or read about, and he can’t
very well ever have seen me, for instance. But even though he
recognizes everyone at once, he starts by asking questions as if he

wasn’t sure. “Aren’t you Barnabas?” he said to me. Then he asked:
“You know the land surveyor, don’t you?” And then he said:
“This is handy. I’m just going to the Castle Inn. Tell the land surveyor to call and see me there. I’ll be in Room 15. But he’ll have to
come at once. I have only a few hearings to conduct there, and I’ll be
going back at ﬁve in the morning. Tell him I am very anxious to
speak to him.” ’
Suddenly Jeremias set oﬀ at a run. Barnabas, who had hardly
noticed him before in his excitement, asked: ‘What’s up with
Jeremias?’ ‘He wants to get to Erlanger ahead of me,’ said K., running after Jeremias himself. He caught up with him, took his arm
ﬁrmly, and said: ‘Is it desire for Frieda that’s come over you all of a
sudden? I feel exactly the same, so we’ll go at the same pace.’
A small group of men stood outside the dark Castle Inn, two or
three of them carrying lanterns, so that you could make out many of
their faces. K. saw only one man he knew, Gerstäcker the carrier.
Gerstäcker greeted him with the words: ‘So you’re still in the
village, are you?’ ‘Yes,’ said K. ‘I’m here indeﬁnitely.’ ‘Well, that’s
nothing to do with me,’ said Gerstäcker, coughing hard and turning
to the others.
It turned out that they were all waiting for Erlanger. Erlanger had
arrived, but he was still talking to Momus before receiving the other
members of the public. The general conversation turned on the fact
that they weren’t allowed to wait inside the inn, but had to stand out
here in the snow. To be sure, it wasn’t very cold, but all the same it
was thoughtless to leave them waiting outside the house in the night,
perhaps for hours. Of course, that was not Erlanger’s fault, he was
said to be very easygoing, he probably hardly knew about it, and
would certainly have been very angry if he had been told. It was all
the fault of the landlady of the Castle Inn, who in her neurotic striving for reﬁnement didn’t want so many members of the public in the
Castle Inn all at once. ‘If we must have them here, if they really must
come,’ she was in the habit of saying, ‘then for heaven’s sake let them
come one after another.’ And she had carried her point, so the members of the public, who at ﬁrst just waited in a corridor, had to wait
on the stairs later, then in the front hall, ﬁnally in the bar, and last of
all they were thrown out into the street. Even that wasn’t enough for
her. She found it intolerable to be ‘always under siege’, as she put it,
in her own house. She couldn’t understand why members of the

public had to come there at all. ‘To make the steps outside the house
dirty,’ an oﬃcial had once said in answer to her question. He probably
spoke in anger, but she had found the idea very plausible, and liked
to quote his remark. She was trying to get a building put up opposite
the Castle Inn where members of the public could wait, which in fact
would suit their own wishes very well. She would have liked it best
of all if discussions with the members of the public and hearings had
taken place entirely away from the Castle Inn, but the oﬃcials
opposed any such idea, and if the oﬃcials seriously opposed it then
of course the landlady couldn’t win, although she did exercise a kind
of little tyranny in minor matters, thanks to her tireless yet softly
feminine zeal. However, it looked as if the landlady would have to
continue putting up with discussions and hearings at the Castle Inn,
for the gentlemen from the castle declined to leave the inn to go
about their oﬃcial business when they were in the village. They were
always in a hurry, and anyway they came to the village only very
much against their will; they had not the faintest desire to prolong
the time they spent here beyond what was strictly necessary, so they
could not be expected to move temporarily over the street with all
their papers, thus losing time, just for the sake of peace and quiet in
the Castle Inn. They liked best to do oﬃcial business in the bar or in
their rooms, if possible during a meal, or from their beds either
before going to sleep or in the morning, when they felt too tired to
get up and wanted to lie in bed a little longer. However, the question
of erecting a building where they could wait seemed to be approaching a happy solution, although of course it was a real trial for the
landlady—people laughed about that a little—because the building
of such a place in itself made many discussions necessary, and the
corridors of the inn were hardly ever empty.
The people now waiting were discussing all these things under
their breath. It struck K. that while there was plenty of grumbling
here, no one had any objection to Erlanger’s summoning members of
the public in the middle of the night. He asked about that, and was
told that in fact they ought to be very grateful to Erlanger. Apparently
it was solely his own good nature and his elevated concept of his
oﬃce that moved him to come down to the village at all. If he had
wanted he could have sent some under-secretary to take down statements instead, which in fact might have been more in line with the
regulations. But he generally refrained from doing so, he wanted to

see and hear everything for himself, although it meant giving up his
nights for the purpose, because no time for visits was provided in his
oﬃcial timetable. K. objected that Klamm too came to the village by
day, and even spent several days on end here. Was Erlanger, who was
only of secretarial rank, more indispensable up at the castle? A few
good-natured people laughed, while others preserved an awkward
silence, the latter were in the majority, and no one seemed inclined
to answer K.’s question. But one man did say, hesitantly, well, of
course Klamm was indispensable in the castle and the village alike.
Then the door of the inn opened, and Momus appeared between
two servants carrying lamps. ‘The ﬁrst to be admitted to Mr Secretary
Erlanger’, he said, ‘are Gerstäcker and K. Are those two here?’ They
said they were, but then Jeremias slipped into the house ahead of
them, saying: ‘I’m the room-service waiter here,’ and was greeted by
Momus with a pat on the back. ‘I see I’ll have to keep a closer eye on
Jeremias,’ said K. to himself, although he was aware that Jeremias
was probably far less dangerous than Artur, who was intriguing
against him up in the castle. Perhaps it was actually wiser to let the
assistants pester him than to allow them to wander around unchecked,
free to hatch the plots that they seemed to delight in so much.
When K. passed Momus the latter acted as if he only now recognized him. ‘Ah, the land surveyor!’ he said. ‘The man who was so
unwilling to answer questions is now anxious for a hearing. You’d
have had an easier time of it with me. Ah, well, it’s diﬃcult to choose
the right hearing.’ And when, at these words, K. was about to stop
dead, Momus said: ‘Go along, go along in! I could have done with
your answers then, I don’t need them any more now.’ All the same
K., nettled by the attitude of Momus, said: ‘You none of you think
of anything but yourselves. I’m not answering questions just because
you’re oﬃcials, either then or now.’ ‘Well, who else would we be
thinking of ?’ said Momus. ‘Who else matters here? Go along in!’
A servant received them in the front hall and led them the way
that K. already knew, across the yard, then through the gate, and into
the low corridor that sloped slightly down. Obviously only the
higher-ranking oﬃcials stayed on the upper ﬂoors, while the rooms
for the secretaries, even Erlanger, who was one of the most important
of them, lay oﬀ this corridor. The servant extinguished his lantern,
for there was bright electric light here, where everything was built on
a small scale but delicately designed. The best possible use was made

of the space. You could only just walk upright along the corridor;
door after door opened oﬀ the sides of it, all the doors close to each
other, and the walls did not go all the way up to the ceiling, presumably for ventilation, since there were probably no windows in the
little rooms oﬀ this low-lying, cellar-like passage. The disadvantage
of the gap at the top of the walls was that the corridor and inevitably
the rooms too were noisy. Many of the rooms seemed to be occupied,
and the occupants of most of these were still awake, for voices,
hammer-blows, and the clinking of glasses could be heard. However,
there was no impression of any particular merriment. The voices
were muted; you could catch a word here and there, and no conversations seemed to be going on; the voices were probably just dictating
or reading something aloud. No words were spoken in the rooms
where the clink of plates and glasses could be heard, and the
hammer-blows reminded K. of something he had once been told:
many of the oﬃcials, as a means of relaxation after their constant
intellectual eﬀorts, liked to go in for hobbies like joinery, precision
engineering, and so on. The corridor itself was empty, except for a
tall, pale, lean gentleman who was sitting outside one door, wearing
a fur coat with his nightclothes showing under it. He had probably
found it too stuﬀy in the room, so he was sitting outside reading a
newspaper, but not very attentively. He often stopped reading with
a yawn, and then leaned forward to look down the corridor. Perhaps
he was expecting a member of the public whom he had asked to come
and see him and who was late. When they had passed him the servant
said to Gerstäcker, referring to the gentleman: ‘That’s Pinzgauer!’
Gerstäcker nodded. ‘He hasn’t been down here for a long time,’ he
said. ‘No, indeed, not for a long time,’ agreed the servant.
Finally they came to a door that looked no diﬀerent from the rest,
although, as the servant informed them, Erlanger was staying in the
room behind it. The servant got K. to raise him on his shoulders and
then looked down into the room through the space above the corridor wall. ‘He’s lying on his bed,’ said the servant, clambering back
down to the ﬂoor, ‘fully clothed, but I think he’s asleep. Sometimes
weariness overcomes him in the village; it’s the diﬀerent way of life
here. We’ll have to wait. He’ll ring the bell when he wakes up. I’ve
known him to sleep away his entire visit to the village, and then have
to go back to the castle as soon as he woke again. After all, it’s voluntary
work he does down here.’ ‘Let’s hope he has his sleep out, then,’ said

Gerstäcker, ‘because if he has any time left for work after he wakes
up he’ll be very cross that he fell asleep, he’ll try to get everything
done in a hurry, and we’ll hardly have any chance to say a thing.’
‘You’ve come about a permit for the rights to work as a carrier for the
building-site, have you?’ asked the servant. Gerstäcker nodded, drew
the servant aside, and spoke to him quietly, but the man was hardly
listening. He looked beyond Gerstäcker, for he was more than a head
taller, and gravely and slowly ran his hand over his hair.

22
Then, looking aimlessly around, K. saw Frieda in the distance, at a
turn in the corridor; she acted as if she didn’t recognize him, and just
looked blankly at him. She was carrying a tray of empty dishes. He
told the servant, although the man didn’t seem to be attending to
him—the more you spoke to this servant the more his mind appeared
to be elsewhere—that he would be back in a minute, and walked
towards Frieda. On reaching her, he grasped her by the shoulders as
if taking possession of her again, asked a few trivial questions, and
looked searchingly into her eyes. But her rigid bearing hardly
changed; she absently tried rearranging the china on the tray several
times and said: ‘What do you want from me? Go back to those—well,
you know their names. You’ve just come from them, I can tell that
you have.’ K. hastily changed the subject; he didn’t want this subject
to be broached so suddenly, and to begin in the worst, least promising way possible for him. ‘I thought you’d be in the bar,’ he said.
Frieda looked at him in surprise, and then gently passed her one free
hand over his forehead and cheek. It was as if she had forgotten what
he looked like, and did that to recall him to her mind. Her eyes too
had a veiled look of appearing to remember something with diﬃculty. ‘Yes, I’ve been taken back to work in the bar,’ she said slowly,
as if it didn’t matter what she said, but beneath the words she spoke
she was conducting another and more important conversation with
K. ‘The work down here isn’t ﬁt for me, any girl can do it—anyone
who can make a bed and look friendly and doesn’t fear the pestering
of the guests, but actually invites it, can be a chambermaid. But a
barmaid is a diﬀerent matter. I was taken back at once to work in the
bar, although I left the post in circumstances that weren’t very creditable, but of course this time I had protection. And the landlord was
glad I had protection, which made it easy for him to take me back. It
was almost as if they had to press me to take the job, and if you stop
to think what the bar reminds me of you’ll understand why. But in
the end I accepted. I’m just helping out as a chambermaid. Pepi
asked them not to shame her by making her leave the bar at once, so
since she’s been working hard, and done everything as well as she

was able, we’ve given her twenty-four hours’ grace.’ ‘That’s all very
eﬃciently arranged,’ said K., ‘but you once left the bar for my sake,
and are you going back there now just before our wedding?’ ‘There
isn’t going to be any wedding,’ said Frieda. ‘Because you think I was
unfaithful?’ asked K. Frieda nodded. ‘Look here, Frieda,’ said K.,
‘we’ve often talked about this supposed unfaithfulness of mine, and
in the end you always had to acknowledge that your suspicions were
unjust. Nothing has changed since then so far as I’m concerned,
everything is as innocent as ever, and that can’t change either. So
there must have been some change on your part, because of rumours
whispered by other people, or perhaps another reason. You do me
wrong anyway, for what do you think my feelings are for those two
girls? One of them, the dark one—I am almost ashamed to have to
defend myself in such detail, but you make me—I probably ﬁnd the
dark girl’s company as awkward as you do; if I can avoid her then I
do, and that suits her as well. No one could be more reserved.’ ‘Yes,’
cried Frieda, and the words burst out as if against her will. K. was
glad to see her mind diverted from the subject. She wasn’t acting as
she had intended. ‘You may think her reserved, you call that most
shameless of all women reserved, and incredible as it may be you
mean it; you are not pretending, I know that. The landlady of the
Bridge Inn says of you: “I can’t stand the man, but I can’t leave him
to his fate either; when you see a small child who can’t walk very well
yet venturing too far you can’t help yourself, you have to do something about it.” ’ ‘Well, take her advice this time, then,’ said K., smiling. ‘We can leave that girl right out of it—whether she’s reserved or
shameless, I don’t want to know about her.’ ‘But why do you call her
reserved?’ Frieda persisted. K. thought this attitude of hers a good
sign for him. ‘Have you tried making approaches, or do you want to
run others down by saying so?’ ‘Neither,’ said K. ‘I’m just glad I can
describe her as reserved, because she makes it easy for me to ignore
her, and if she were to accost me frequently I couldn’t bring myself
to go back there, which would be unfortunate, since I have to go
there on account of our joint future, as you know. That’s why I have
to talk to the other girl, and while I appreciate her eﬃciency, circumspection, and lack of egotism, no one can call her a temptress.’ ‘The
servants think otherwise,’ said Frieda. ‘In that and in much else,’
said K. ‘Are you going to conclude that I’m unfaithful because the
servants give their lust free rein?’ Frieda did not reply, and allowed

K. to take the tray from her, put it on the ﬂoor, link arms with her,
and begin slowly walking up and down the small space in her company. ‘You don’t know what it means to be faithful,’ she said, pulling
slightly away from him. ‘The way you may behave with those girls
isn’t the main thing; your going to see that family at all and coming
back with the smell of their living-room on your clothes shames me
beyond bearing. And then you leave the school without a word. And
you stay half the night with them, and when someone comes looking
for you, you get the girls to deny that you are there, to deny it passionately, especially the one who’s so wonderfully reserved. You
slink out of the house by a secret way, perhaps to spare the reputation
of those girls. The reputation of those girls, indeed! No, let’s not talk
about it any more.’ ‘No, let’s not talk about that,’ agreed K., ‘but
about something else. You’re right, there’s no more to be said on that
subject. You know why I have to go there. It isn’t easy for me, but I
overcome my feelings. You shouldn’t make it harder for me than it
is already. Today I meant to call just for a minute and ask whether
Barnabas was home at last, because for a long time he’s been supposed to be bringing me an important message. He hadn’t returned,
but I was credibly assured that he was bound to be home soon.
I didn’t want to have him following me back to the school, in order
to spare you his presence. Well, the hours passed by, and I’m afraid
he didn’t come. But someone else did, someone I hate. I didn’t want
to have him spying on me, so I left through the garden of the house
next door, but I wasn’t going to hide from him either, and instead I
went openly out on the road, carrying, I admit, a very ﬂexible willow
switch. That’s all, so there’s no more to be said about that either,
although again there is something else to add. What about those
assistants, mention of whom I ﬁnd almost as repellent as mention of
that family is to you? Compare your relationship with them and my
conduct towards that family. I understand your dislike of the family,
and can share it. I visit them only for the sake of our cause, and
sometimes I almost feel that I’m exploiting them and doing them
wrong. But what about you and the assistants? You don’t deny that
they are pursuing you, and you’ve admitted that you are attracted to
them. I wasn’t angry with you for that, I saw that there are forces
beyond your control at work here, I was happy to think that at least
you were resisting, I helped to defend you, and just because
I neglected to do so for a couple of hours, trusting in your constancy

and, moreover, in the hope that the place was ﬁrmly locked up and
the assistants ﬁnally put to ﬂight—I’m afraid I keep underestimating
them—just because I neglected our defence for a couple of hours,
and that man Jeremias, who when you look at him closely is not
very healthy and is getting on in years, had the gall to go up to the
window—am I to lose you just for that, Frieda, and be greeted with
the news that “there isn’t going to be any wedding”? Shouldn’t I be
the one to feel I might reproach you? But I don’t, no, I still don’t
reproach you.’ Once again, it seemed a good idea to K. to take
Frieda’s mind oﬀ the subject, so he asked her to bring him something
to eat, since he hadn’t eaten anything since midday. Obviously
relieved by such a request, Frieda nodded and went oﬀ to fetch
something, going not further along the corridor in what K. expected
to be the direction of the kitchen, but down a couple of steps to one
side. She soon brought back a plate of sliced cold meats and a bottle
of wine, but these looked like the remains of someone else’s supper.
The slices of meat had been rearranged in a hurry to disguise the
fact, but there were even some sausage-skins left on the plate, and the
bottle was three-quarters empty. However, K. said nothing about
that, and set about his meal with a hearty appetite. ‘Did you go to the
kitchen?’ he asked. ‘No, to my room,’ she said. ‘I have a room down
here.’ ‘Well, you might have taken me with you,’ said K. ‘I’ll go along
there now so that I can sit down while I eat.’ ‘I’ll bring you a chair,’
said Frieda, and was on her way again. ‘No, thank you,’ said K., holding her back. ‘I won’t go down there after all, nor do I need a chair
now.’ Frieda bore his grip on her with an expression of deﬁance, with
her head bent and biting her lip. ‘Very well, yes, he’s down there,’ she
said. ‘What else did you expect? He’s lying in my bed, he caught a
chill outside, he’s freezing, he could hardly eat a thing. Basically it’s
all your fault. If you hadn’t chased the assistants away and gone running after those people, we could be sitting peacefully in the schoolhouse now. You’re the one who’s destroyed our happiness. Do you
think that as long as he was in your service Jeremias would have dared
to run oﬀ with me? If so, you don’t understand the way things work
here in the slightest. He wanted to be near me, he was in torments, he
lay in wait for me, but that was just a game, like a hungry dog playing
about yet not daring to jump on the table. And it was the same with
me. I was attracted to him, he was my playmate in our childhood
days—we played together on the slopes of Castle Mount, ah, happy

days! You’ve never asked me about my past life. But none of that
mattered as long as Jeremias was kept in check by his service to you,
for I knew my duty as your future wife. But then you go driving the
assistants away and boasting of it too, as if you’d done it all for me,
which in a certain sense is true. Your intentions worked with Artur,
although only for the time being, he is a sensitive soul, he doesn’t
have the passion of Jeremias, who fears no diﬃculty. You almost
killed Artur with that blow of your ﬁst in the night—it was a blow
struck against our happiness too. He ﬂed to the castle to complain,
and although he may be back soon, he’s not here now. Jeremias,
however, stayed. While he’s on duty he fears the merest ﬂicker of his
master’s eyes, but oﬀ duty he fears nothing. He came and took me
away when you had abandoned me. Under my old friend’s inﬂuence
I couldn’t help myself. I didn’t unlock the school door; he broke the
window and helped me out. We ﬂed here, the landlord respects him,
and the guests will be delighted to have such a good waiter on room
service, so we were taken in. He isn’t living with me, but we share
the same room.’ ‘In spite of everything,’ said K., ‘I’m not sorry I
drove the assistants away from my service. If the relationship was as
you describe it, then it was as well for everything to come to an end.
Our happiness wouldn’t have been very great, in a marriage where
two beasts of prey who duck only under the lash were also present.
So I am grateful to that family too, since they unintentionally played
their part in separating us.’ They fell silent, and went on walking up
and down. No one could have said who had begun it. Frieda, beside
K., seemed cross that he did not take her arm again. ‘So everything
would be all right,’ K. went on, ‘and we could part and go away, you
to your new master Jeremias, who probably still has a chill from the
school garden—considering that, perhaps you’ve left him alone too
long—I to go back to the school on my own or, since I have no business there without you, somewhere else, anywhere they will take me
in. If I hesitate all the same, it’s because I still have good reason to
doubt what you’ve told me a little. I get quite the opposite impression of Jeremias. All the time he was in my service he was after you,
and I don’t think being on duty would have kept him for ever from
attacking you in earnest. But now that he thinks his service to me is
over, it’s diﬀerent. Forgive me if I put it like this: since you are not
his master’s ﬁancée any more, you are not such a temptation to him
as you were before. You may be his childhood sweetheart, but in my

opinion—although I really know him only from a short conversation
last night—he doesn’t place much value on such emotions. I don’t
know why he seems to you passionate. His way of thinking strikes me
as particularly cool. As far as I’m concerned, he was given a job by
Galater which was not, perhaps, very much to my liking, he tried to
carry it out, with a certain devotion to duty, yes, that I will admit—it
isn’t so very rare here—and part of it was to destroy our relationship.
He may have tried that in various ways, one of them being to tempt
you by his lustful behaviour, another—and here the landlady supported him—to tell lies about my unfaithfulness. He succeeded in
his attempt; some kind of memory of Klamm clinging to him may
have helped; he did lose his post, but perhaps at the very moment
when he didn’t need it any more, and now he harvests the fruits of
his labours by helping you out of the school window, but with that
his work is over, he’s not devoted to duty any more, he feels tired.
He’d rather be in Artur’s place. Artur is probably not complaining at
all but is enjoying praise and new commissions, but someone has to
stay behind to see how things develop now. Looking after you is his
rather onerous obligation. He doesn’t feel a trace of love for you, he
told me so openly, as Klamm’s former lover you seem to him, naturally, someone to be respected, and settling into your room and feeling like a little Klamm for once must be very nice, but that’s all. You
yourself mean nothing to him, it is only as a small part of his main
task that he has had you taken back here; he’s stayed himself so as not
to make you uneasy, but only for the time being, until he gets more
news from the castle and you have cured him of his chill.’ ‘How you
slander him!’ said Frieda, and struck her little ﬁsts together. ‘Slander
him?’ said K. ‘No, I don’t mean to slander him. But I may be doing
him wrong, that’s always possible. What I have said about him isn’t
clear for all to see; it may be interpreted otherwise. But slander? The
only purpose of slander could be to counter your love for him. If that
were necessary, and if slander were a suitable means, I wouldn’t
hesitate to slander him. No one could blame me for that; the man
who sent him gave him such an advantage over me that, alone and
relying only on myself, I might well try a little slander. It would be a
relatively innocent, if ultimately useless, means of defence. So give
those ﬁsts of yours a rest.’ And K. took Frieda’s hand in his; Frieda
tried to withdraw it, but smilingly, and not exerting very much
strength. ‘However, I don’t have to slander him,’ said K., ‘because

you don’t love him, you only think you do, and you will be grateful
to me for opening your eyes to the deception. Look, if someone
wanted to separate you from me without force, but by dint of very
careful calculation, then it had to be done through the two assistants.
Apparently good, childish, amusing, irresponsible lads coming here
from on high, from the castle, a little memory of your childhood too,
that’s all very delightful, particularly if I am the opposite of all this,
always out and about on business that you don’t entirely understand,
that bothers you, that brings me together with people whom you dislike, and for all my innocence perhaps you transfer some of that dislike to me. The whole thing is just a malicious, if very clever,
exploitation of the ﬂaws in our relationship. Every relationship has
its ﬂaws, and so does ours; we came together out of two entirely
diﬀerent worlds, and since we have known each other both our lives
have taken an entirely new turn. We still feel uncertain of ourselves;
it is all too new. I am not speaking about myself, that’s not so important, basically I have been given gift after gift since you ﬁrst turned
your eyes to mine, and it’s not very diﬃcult to get accustomed to
gifts. But you, apart from everything else, were torn away from
Klamm; I can’t judge what that means, but I have gradually gained
some notion of it. The ground shakes beneath your feet, you can’t ﬁnd
your way, and even if I was always ready to steady you I wasn’t always
present, and when I was, your attention was sometimes claimed by
your reveries, or a more physical presence such as the landlady—there
were moments when you looked away from me, longing to be somewhere else, somewhere half-unspeciﬁed, poor child, and in such
interim periods suitable people had only to be brought in front of
your eyes and you were lost to them, a prey to the pretence that what
were only brief moments, ghosts, old memories of your past life now
passing further and further away, still made up your real life in the
present. A mistake, Frieda, nothing but the last obstacle in the way of
our ﬁnal union, and seen in the right light it’s a pathetic one. Come to
yourself, come to your senses; you may have thought that the assistants
were sent by Klamm—which is not true; they come from Galater—and
if they could cast such a spell on you with the help of that deception,
you may then have thought you saw traces of Klamm even in their dirt
and dissolute ways, just as someone may think he sees a lost jewel in
a muck-heap, while he couldn’t ﬁnd it there even if it were real.
But they are only rough fellows like the servants who sleep in the

stables, except that they don’t have the same sturdy good health; a
little fresh air makes them sick and sends them to bed, although they
know how to choose the bed as astutely as any of those servants.’
Frieda had laid her head on K.’s shoulder, and they walked up and
down in silence, with their arms around one another. ‘If only,’ said
Frieda slowly, calmly, almost contentedly, as if she knew that only a
little time of peace against K.’s shoulder was granted her, but she
wanted to enjoy it to the last, ‘if only we had gone away at once, that
very night, we could be somewhere safe now, still together, your
hand always close enough for me to take it. How I need to have you
close, how lost I have felt when I am without you ever since we met.
Being close to you, believe me, is my dream, that and only that.’
Then someone called out in the side corridor. It was Jeremias; he
stood there on the bottom step in nothing but his shirt, but with a
shawl of Frieda’s wrapped around him. As he stood there, hair tousled, his thin beard looking drenched as if with rain, keeping his eyes
open with diﬃculty, pleading and reproachful, his dark cheeks reddened but the ﬂesh of them sagging, his bare legs trembling with
cold, so that the long fringe of the shawl trembled too, he looked like
a patient escaped from the hospital, and setting eyes on him you
could think of nothing but getting him back to bed. That was how
Frieda herself saw it. She moved away from K. and was beside him
in a minute. Having her near him, the careful way with which she
drew the shawl more closely around him, her haste in trying to make
him go straight back into the room, seemed to make Jeremias a little
stronger already. It was as if only now did he recognize K. ‘Ah, the
land surveyor,’ he said, while Frieda, who didn’t want any more talk,
patted his cheek soothingly. ‘Forgive me for disturbing you, but I
don’t feel at all well, so you’ll excuse me. I think I’m running a temperature, I need an infusion to make me sweat. Those damned railings in the school garden, I still think of them, and now, with a chill
already, I’ve been running around all night. A man sacriﬁces his
health, without even noticing at once, for things that really aren’t
worth it. But as for you, Mr Land Surveyor, please don’t let me
disturb you. Come into our room with us, come and visit the sick,
and tell Frieda what else you have to say to her in there. If two people
who are well known to each other part, of course they have so much
to say in those last moments that a third person, even if he is lying in
bed waiting for the promised infusion, can’t possibly understand it.

But do come in, and I’ll keep perfectly quiet.’ ‘Hush, hush,’ said
Frieda, pulling at his arm. ‘He’s feverish and doesn’t know what he’s
saying. But please don’t go with him, K. It is my and Jeremias’s
room, or rather just my room, and I am forbidding you to go into it.
You are persecuting me, oh K., why are you persecuting me? I will
never, never come back to you; I shudder at the mere thought of it.
Go to those girls of yours; they sit on the bench with you beside their
stove in nothing but their shifts, as I’ve been told, and if someone
comes looking for you they spit and hiss at him. I’m sure you feel
very much at home there if you are so drawn to the place. I have
always tried to keep you away from it, with little success, but I did
try to keep you from it. Well, that’s over now. You are free. You have
a ﬁne life before you—you may have to ﬁght the servants a little over
one of them, but as for the second girl, no one on earth will grudge
her to you. Your union is already blessed. Say nothing against it, I’m
sure you’ll try to refute it all, but in the end it’s not to be denied. Just
think, Jeremias, he denied it all!’ And they nodded and smiled at
each other. ‘But,’ Frieda went on, ‘supposing he had refuted it all,
what good would that have done, what do I care? As for what may
happen to someone visiting those folk, that’s their business and his,
not mine. It is my business to nurse you until you’re as healthy as you
were before K. started tormenting you on my account.’ ‘So you really
won’t come with us, Mr Land Surveyor?’ asked Jeremias, but Frieda,
who wouldn’t even turn to look at K. any more, led him away. Down
below K. could see a small door, even lower than the doors here in
the corridor. Not only Jeremias but Frieda too had to bend her head
as she went in. It looked bright and warm inside. There was still a
little whispering to be heard, probably Frieda lovingly persuading
Jeremias to go back to bed, and then the door was closed.

23
Only now did K. notice how quiet it had become in the corridor—not
just in this part of the corridor, where he had been standing with
Frieda and which seemed to be part of the domestic staﬀ ’s quarters,
but also in the long corridor with the rooms that had earlier sounded
so lively leading oﬀ it. So the gentlemen had ﬁnally gone to sleep. K.
himself was very tired, perhaps so weary that he hadn’t defended
himself against Jeremias as he should have done. It might have been
cleverer to take his cue from Jeremias himself, who was obviously
exaggerating his chill—his pitiful state was not the result of a chill
but was innate in him, not to be cured by any healthy herbal infusion—yes, to take his cue from Jeremias, make a great spectacle of
his very real weariness, collapse here in the corridor, which
would surely feel good, sleep for a while, and then perhaps enjoy a
little nursing. Only it wouldn’t have turned out as well as it did for
Jeremias, who would certainly and probably rightly have won in any
such competition for sympathy, and no doubt any other contest too.
K. was so tired that he wondered whether he might not try getting
into one of these rooms, many of which must be empty, and have a
good long sleep in a ﬁne bed. He thought that might compensate for
a good deal. He had a nightcap ready to hand too. There had been a
small carafe of rum on the tray of china that Frieda had left lying on
the ﬂoor. K. did not shrink from the eﬀort of going back to it, and
emptied the little ﬂask.
Now at least he felt strong enough to appear before Erlanger. He
looked for the door of Erlanger’s room, but as the servant and
Gerstäcker were no longer to be seen, and all the doors looked the same,
he couldn’t ﬁnd it. However, he thought he remembered roughly
whereabouts in the corridor the door was, and decided to try opening
a door that in his opinion was probably the one he wanted. The venture couldn’t be too risky; if the door led to Erlanger’s room, he
supposed Erlanger would see him now; if it was someone else’s room
he could apologize and leave again, and if the guest in the room was
asleep, which was the most likely outcome, K.’s visit wouldn’t even
be noticed. It could be unfortunate only if the room was empty, for

then K. would hardly be able to resist the temptation of lying down
on the bed and getting some sleep at last. He looked to right and left
down the corridor again, to see whether, after all, anyone was coming
who could give him information and make his daring venture unnecessary, but the long corridor was quiet and empty. Then K. listened
at the door, but again there was no noise. He knocked so softly that
the sound could not have woken anyone sleeping inside, and when
still nothing happened he very cautiously opened the door. However,
a slight scream came to his ears. It was a small room, more than half
ﬁlled by a broad bed, the electric light on the bedside table was on,
and there was a small travelling-bag beside it. In the bed, but entirely
hidden under the covers, someone moved uneasily and whispered,
through a gap between the blanket and the sheet: ‘Who’s there?’ K.
couldn’t simply leave again now, and he looked unhappily at the
handsome but occupied bed, then remembered the question and
gave his name. This seemed to make a good impression. The man in
the bed drew the blanket back from his face a little way, but in alarm,
ready to disappear again if anything was wrong out there. But then,
making up his mind, he turned the blanket right back and sat
upright. He certainly wasn’t Erlanger. He was a small gentleman,
evidently in good health, whose features didn’t quite ﬁt with each
other by virtue of the fact that the cheeks were childishly plump and
the eyes childishly merry, but the high forehead, the sharp nose, the
narrow mouth with lips that would hardly stay closed, and the almost
receding chin were not childish at all, but indicated a capacity for
deep thought. It was probably his self-satisfaction with that which
had helped him to preserve a pronounced streak of healthy childishness. ‘Do you know Friedrich?’ he asked. K. said he did not. ‘But he
knows you,’ said the gentleman, smiling. K. nodded; there were
plenty of people who knew him, in fact it was one of the chief obstacles in his path. ‘I’m his secretary,’ said the gentleman, ‘and my
name is Bürgel.’* ‘I’m sorry,’ said K., reaching for the door-handle.
‘I’m afraid I mixed your door up with another one. I was summoned
to see Mr Secretary Erlanger.’ ‘What a pity!’ said Bürgel. ‘Not that
you’re summoned to see someone else, it’s a pity you mixed the doors
up. You see, once I’m woken I can never get to sleep again. Well, no
need for that to upset you, it’s my personal misfortune. Why can’t
the doors here be locked, do you think? There’s certainly a reason for
it. An old saying has it that the doors of secretaries are always open.

Still, it needn’t be taken quite so literally.’ And Bürgel looked at K.
inquiringly and cheerfully, for despite his complaint he seemed to be
well rested, and probably had never been as tired as K. was just now.
‘Where are you going?’ asked Bürgel. ‘It’s four in the morning.
You’d have to wake up anyone you wanted to see now; not everyone’s as used to being disturbed as I am, not everyone will take it so
patiently, the secretaries are a highly strung lot. So stay here for a
while. They begin to get up about ﬁve o’clock in this place, and then
you’ll be able to comply with your summons better. So please let go
of that handle and sit down somewhere, not that there’s much room,
to be sure. You’d better sit on the edge of this bed. Are you surprised
that I have neither a chair nor a table in here? Well, I had the choice
of either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel bed, or
this big bed and nothing else but the washstand. I chose the big bed;
after all, the bed is what matters most in a bedroom. Ah, this bed
would be really excellent for a good sleeper, a man who could stretch
out and sleep well. But it does even me good, always tired as I am
without being able to sleep. I spend a large part of the day in it, I do
all my correspondence here, and it’s where I conduct my hearings
with members of the public. It works very well. To be sure, the
members of the public have nowhere to sit, but they can manage
without, and anyway it’s nicer for them to stand while the person
conducting the hearing feels good than to sit comfortably while he
keeps shouting at them. So I can oﬀer only this place on the edge of
the bed, but it’s not an oﬃcial place, it’s just meant for nocturnal
conversations. But you are so quiet, Mr Land Surveyor.’ ‘I’m very
tired,’ said K., who had sat down on the bed at once on being invited,
abruptly and unceremoniously, leaning against the bedpost. ‘Of
course you are,’ said Bürgel, laughing. ‘Everyone here is tired. For
instance, it was no small workload I dealt with both yesterday and
today. It’s out of the question for me to sleep now, but if that
extremely improbable event should occur, if I were to fall asleep
while you’re here, then please keep perfectly still and don’t open the
door. Never fear, though, I certainly won’t fall asleep, or if I do it will
be at most only for a few minutes. The fact is that, probably because
I am so used to the coming and going of members of the public,
I always sleep most easily when I have company.’ ‘Do by all means
go to sleep, Mr Secretary,’ said K., pleased to hear this announcement. ‘And then, if you will allow me, I will get a little sleep too.’

‘No, no,’ laughed Bürgel again. ‘I’m afraid I can’t fall asleep merely
on invitation, the opportunity may come only in the course of conversation. Yes, a conversation is the most likely thing to send me to
sleep. Our business is bad for the nerves, you see. I, for instance, am
a communications secretary. You don’t know what that is? Well, I am
the main line of communication’—and so saying he rubbed his
hands quickly with instinctive cheerfulness—‘between Friedrich
and the village, I deal with communications between his castle secretary and his village secretary, I am generally in the village but not all
the time, I have to be ready to drive up to the castle at a moment’s
notice. You see that travelling-bag—ah, it’s a restless life, it’s not for
everyone. On the other hand, it’s a fact that I couldn’t do without
this kind of work now, any other work would seem to me dull. And
what is land surveying like?’ ‘I’m not doing any of that; I’m not
employed as a land surveyor here,’ said K., whose thoughts were not
really on the subject. In fact he was simply longing for Bürgel to go
to sleep, although even that was out of a certain sense of what he
owed to himself; in the depths of his mind he thought he knew that
the moment when Bürgel might fall asleep was still incalculably far
away. ‘Well, that’s amazing,’ said Bürgel, throwing his head back in
a lively manner and producing a notepad from under the blanket to
write something down on it. ‘You are a land surveyor, and you have
no surveying work to do.’ K. nodded mechanically. He had raised his
left arm to the top of the bedpost and was resting his head on it. He
had already tried various ways of making himself comfortable, but
this was the most comfortable position of all. Now he could pay a
little more attention to what Bürgel was saying. ‘I am prepared’,
Bürgel went on, ‘to pursue this question further. Matters here are
certainly not in such a state that any professional skill ought to be left
unused. And it must annoy you too. Don’t you suﬀer from it?’ ‘I do
indeed suﬀer from it,’ said K. slowly, smiling to himself, for just
now he did not suﬀer from it in the slightest. Moreover, Bürgel’s
oﬀer made little impression on him. It sounded thoroughly amateurish. Knowing nothing of the circumstances of K.’s appointment, of
the diﬃculties put in its way in the village and the castle, of the complications that had already arisen or looked like arising during K.’s
stay here—knowing nothing about any of that, even without giving
any sign that, as might have been expected of a secretary, he had
some faint idea of it all, he was proposing to put the whole thing in

order with the help of his little notepad, just like that. But then
Bürgel said: ‘You seem to have had several disappointments already,’
thus showing a certain understanding of human nature again, and
ever since K. entered this room he had told himself from time to time
not to underestimate Bürgel. However, in his present condition it
was diﬃcult to judge anything properly except his own weariness.
‘No, no,’ said Bürgel, as if replying to some thought in K.’s mind and
kindly sparing him the trouble of saying it out loud. ‘You mustn’t let
disappointments deter you. A good deal here seems designed for
deterrence, and when you’re new to the place you feel it’s impossible
to get past the obstacles. I don’t mean to try ﬁnding out how things
really are, perhaps the appearance really corresponds to the reality,
in my position I don’t stand at the right distance from it to establish
that, but note this: opportunities sometimes arise that have hardly
anything to do with the situation as a whole, opportunities when
a word, a glance, a sign of trust can achieve more than tedious, lifelong eﬀorts. Yes, that’s the way of it. Of course these opportunities
do agree with the situation as a whole in so far as they are never
exploited. But why are they not exploited, that’s what I always wonder.’ K. didn’t know. He did indeed realize that what Bürgel was
talking about probably concerned him closely, but just now he had a
great dislike for everything that concerned him closely. He moved
his head a little way aside, as if he could thus leave the way clear
for Bürgel’s questions to pass him by and not touch him any more.
‘It is,’ Bürgel went on, stretching his arms and yawning, in confusing
contrast to the gravity of his words, ‘it is the secretaries’ constant
complaint that they are obliged to hold most hearings in the village
by night. And why do they complain of it? Because it puts too
much strain on them? Because they’d rather use the night for sleeping? No, they deﬁnitely don’t complain of that. Of course there are
both industrious and less industrious men among the secretaries, as
everywhere, but none of them complains of being under excessive
strain, certainly not in public. That is simply not our way. So far as
that’s concerned, we see no diﬀerence between ordinary time and
time spent working. We are strangers to such distinctions. So what
do the secretaries have against hearings conducted by night? Is it
perhaps consideration for the members of the public involved? No,
that’s not it either. The secretaries are not at all considerate of those
members of the public, although they are no more inconsiderate of

the members of the public than they are of themselves, they are
equally inconsiderate to both. And in fact this inconsiderate attitude,
that is to say, the iron observance and performance of their duty,
shows the greatest consideration that members of the public could
wish for. Fundamentally—although a casual observer will not of
course notice it—that is fully appreciated, and as in this case nocturnal hearings are particularly welcome to members of the public, there
is no objection to nocturnal hearings in principle. So why don’t the
secretaries like them?’ K. did not know the answer to that either; he
knew so little about the subject that he couldn’t even tell whether
Bürgel was asking a question seriously or only rhetorically. If you’d
let me lie down in your bed, he thought, I’ll answer any questions
you like at midday tomorrow, or even better in the evening.
But Bürgel did not seem to be taking any notice of K., he was too
interested in the question that he himself had just raised. ‘As far as
I know, and from my own experience, the reservations entertained
by the secretaries about nocturnal hearings are more or less as follows. Night is less suitable for negotiation with members of the
public because it is diﬃcult or actually impossible to maintain the
oﬃcial character of negotiations at night. That is not because of outward details; of course the formalities can be as strictly observed by
night as by day, just as one likes. So that’s not it, but on the other
hand oﬃcial judgement suﬀers by night. One is instinctively inclined
to judge things from a more private point of view then, the points
advanced by members of the public seem to carry more weight than
they should, consideration of the further situation of those members
of the public, of their suﬀerings and sorrows, mingles with our
assessment, where it does not belong. The requisite barrier between
members of the public and oﬃcials, however ﬂawlessly it may be
present to outward appearance, is relaxed, and where usually only
questions and answers are exchanged, which is just as it should be, a
strange and entirely unsuitable exchange between the persons sometimes seems to occur. So at least the secretaries say, and they are
people whose profession means that they have the gift of an extraordinarily sensitive feeling for such things. But even they—and this is
often discussed in our circles—even they notice little of those unfortunate inﬂuences during nocturnal hearings; on the contrary, they
make great eﬀorts from the ﬁrst to counter them, and in the end they
consider that they have done particularly good work. However, if

you read the records later, you are often amazed by the weaknesses
so clearly exposed. And it is these errors, made to the only partly
justiﬁed advantage of the members of the public, which cannot be
dealt with summarily in the usual way, at least not according to our
regulations. Of course they may be corrected by a supervisory oﬃce,
but that will be useful only to the law and cannot aﬀect the person
concerned for the worse. Wouldn’t you say that in such circumstances the complaints of the secretaries are highly justiﬁable?’ K.
had already spent some time half asleep, and now his slumbers were
disturbed again. Why all this, he asked himself, why all this? From
beneath his lowered eyelids, he observed Bürgel not as an oﬃcial who
was discussing diﬃcult questions with him, but simply as something
that kept him from sleeping, and he couldn’t see any other point to
him. Bürgel, however, given over entirely to his own train of thought,
smiled as if he had just succeeded in leading K. slightly astray.
However, he was ready to set him right again. ‘Nor’, he said, ‘can one
call those complaints entirely justiﬁed either, just like that. Nocturnal
hearings are not exactly stipulated anywhere, so no one is breaking
any regulation in trying to avoid them, but the circumstances, the
excessive amount of work, the way in which the oﬃcials in the castle
work, the diﬃculty of getting hold of them, the regulation saying that
hearings of members of the public may be held only after the rest of
an investigation has been entirely concluded, but must then be held
at once, all this and more has made the nocturnal hearings an unavoidable necessity. However, if they have become a necessity—as I
say—then that is also, or at least indirectly, as a result of the regulations, and ﬁnding fault with the nature of nocturnal hearings would
then be almost—mind you, I am exaggerating slightly, so that as it is
an exaggeration I may voice it—would then be almost to ﬁnd fault
with the regulations. On the other hand, it may be allowed that the
secretaries seek to secure themselves as best they can, within the
regulations, against the nocturnal hearings and their disadvantages,
although those may be only apparent. And to a very great extent they
do secure themselves; they admit only subjects of negotiation which
allow as little as possible to be feared in that respect, they test themselves closely before the negotiations and, if the result of the testing
demands it even at the last minute, they withdraw any agreement,
they reinforce their authority by frequently summoning a member of
the public ten times before really considering his case, they like to be

represented by colleagues who are unqualiﬁed to deal with the case
concerned and can thus handle it more easily; they at least hold the
negotiations at the beginning or end of the night and avoid the middle hours—there are plenty of such measures. They do not let anyone get the better of them easily, those secretaries, they are almost as
tough as they are sensitive.’ K. was asleep. It was not real sleep; he
could hear what Bürgel was saying perhaps better than during his
early period of wakeful exhaustion, word after word came to his ear,
but his troublesome consciousness was gone; he felt free, Bürgel no
longer had a hold on him, he just sometimes made his way towards
Bürgel, he was not yet deeply immersed in slumber but he had taken
the plunge, and no one was going to rob him of that now. He felt as
if he had won a great victory, as if a company had gathered to celebrate it, and he or someone else was raising a glass of champagne in
honour of that victory. And so that everyone would know what it was
about, the struggle and the victory were repeated all over again, or
perhaps not repeated, perhaps they were only now taking place but
had been celebrated earlier, and because, luckily, the outcome was
certain there was constant celebration. K. was ﬁghting a naked secretary who greatly resembled the statue of a Greek god, and who was
getting the worst of it. It was very comical, and K. smiled slightly in
his sleep to see the secretary’s proud bearing upset again and again
by K.’s advance, so that he had, for instance, to use his outstretched
arm and clenched ﬁst to cover his nakedness, but was always too slow
about it. The combat did not last long; step after step, and they were
long strides, K. pressed forward. Was it a combat at all? There was
no serious obstacle, only a squeal from the secretary now and then.
That Greek god squealed like a girl being tickled. And ﬁnally he was
gone; K. was alone in a large space. He turned around in it, ready to
ﬁght, looking for his opponent, but there was no one there any more,
the company had left. Only the champagne glass lay on the ground,
broken, and K. trod it to pieces. But the broken glass stung, and he
woke again with a start, feeling unwell like a small child who has been
woken suddenly. All the same, at the sight of Bürgel’s bared chest an
idea came to him from his dream: ‘Here’s your Greek god! Get him
out of bed!’ ‘However,’ said Bürgel, raising his face thoughtfully to
the ceiling as if seeking in his memory for examples but failing to ﬁnd
any, ‘all the same, in spite of all the precautionary measures, there is
an opportunity for members of the public to exploit this nocturnal

weakness of the secretaries, always supposing that it is a weakness,
for their own ends. To be sure it is a very rare opportunity, or more
accurately I should say one that almost never comes. It consists in the
arrival of the person concerned in the middle of the night, unannounced. You may be surprised that this happens so seldom, when it
seems such an obvious thing to do. Well, you are not familiar with
the way we go about things here. But you will have noticed the
impenetrability of the oﬃcial organization. However, that impenetrability in itself means that everyone who has any kind of request to
make, or must be examined on some subject for other reasons,
receives a summons at once, immediately, usually even before he has
thought out his case, why, even before he knows about it. He will not
be examined this time, usually he won’t be examined yet, generally
the case has not reached that point, but he has the summons, which
means that he can’t turn up announced and thus entirely by surprise.
At most, he can come at the wrong time, when the date and hour of
his summons will be pointed out to him, and then, if he comes back
at the right time, as a rule he will be sent away, and there is no more
diﬃculty; the summons in the member of the public’s hand and the
note in the ﬁles are weapons used by the secretaries, and if not always
quite adequate they are still strong. That applies, however, only to
the secretary responsible for the case; anyone would still be at liberty
to take the other secretaries by surprise at night. But hardly anyone
ever will; there’s almost no point in it. First, anyone who did so
would arouse the ire of the secretary responsible for the case. We
secretaries may certainly not be jealous of each other where our work
is concerned, each has only too great a workload to carry, we get
more than enough of that, but in dealing with members of the public
we cannot tolerate any interference with our responsibility. Many
have lost a case because, when they thought they weren’t getting
anywhere with the secretary responsible, they tried to slip past the
network in the wrong way. Such attempts are in fact bound to fail
because a secretary who is not responsible for a case, even if he is
taken by surprise at night and feels inclined to help, can hardly intervene in it because he is not responsible, any more than any random
attorney can, indeed much less so, for even if he might otherwise do
something or other, since he knows the secret ways of the law far
better than all those legal gentlemen, he simply doesn’t have any time
for matters for which he is not responsible, he can’t spare a minute

for them. So who, with these prospects in view, would spend his
nights on the trail of secretaries not responsible for his case? And the
members of the public are fully occupied in trying to comply with
the summonses from and signals given by those who are responsible
for their cases, as well as pursuing their usual professions. I mean
fully occupied of course as members of the public would understand
it, which of course is far from being the same as fully occupied in the
sense in which the secretaries would do so.’ K. nodded with a smile.
He thought he understood all about it, not because it troubled him
but because he was now convinced that he would fall properly asleep
in the next few minutes, and this time without any dream or other
disturbance; between the secretaries responsible on one side and
those not responsible on the other, and in view of the whole crowd
of fully occupied members of the public, he would fall into a deep
sleep and thus escape it all. By now he was so used to Bürgel’s quiet,
self-satisﬁed voice, as he obviously endeavoured in vain to fall asleep
himself, that it was more likely to send him to sleep than disturb his
slumbers. Clatter, mill-wheel, clatter, he thought, clatter on for me.
‘So where,’ said Bürgel, two ﬁngers toying with his lower lip, his
eyes wide, craning his neck, as if he were approaching a delightful
viewing-point after an arduous walk, ‘so where is that elusive opportunity I mentioned, the one that almost never comes? The secret lies
in the way responsibility is regulated. For it is not possible, nor in a
large and living organization can it be, for only a certain secretary to
be responsible for every case. It is simply that one secretary has the
main responsibility, but many others have responsibility, even if less
responsibility, for certain parts of it. Who, however hard a worker,
could accommodate all the papers relating to even the smallest incident on his desk? Even what I have said about the main responsibility
is going too far. Is not the whole thing also contained in the smallest
responsibility? Is not the ardour with which one approaches the case
a crucial point? And is not that always the same, always present at
full strength? There may be diﬀerences between the secretaries in
everything, and there are countless such diﬀerences, but not in the
matter of ardour, none of them will be able to hold back if he receives
an invitation to take part in a case for which he has only the slightest
responsibility. Outwardly, however, an ordered opportunity for
negotiation must be created, and so a certain secretary comes to the
fore where the members of the public are concerned, and it is to him

that they must oﬃcially turn. However, he does not have to be the
one who bears the greatest responsibility for the case; the organization and its particular needs at the time inﬂuence the decision here.
Such is the state of aﬀairs. And now, Mr Land Surveyor, judge what
chance there is for a member of the public, through circumstances of
some kind and despite the obstacles already described to you (which
in general are perfectly adequate), to take a secretary with a certain
responsibility for the case by surprise in the middle of the night after
all. I suppose you haven’t thought of such a thing yet? I’m happy to
believe you. But it isn’t necessary to think of it, because it almost
never happens. What a strange little grain of matter, formed in a
certain special way, how very small and clever such a member of the
public must be if it’s to slip through such a perfect sieve. You think
it can’t happen? You are right, it can’t. But then—and who can guarantee everything?—one night it does happen. To be sure, I know of
no one among my acquaintances to whom it has happened, but that
doesn’t prove much. By comparison with the numbers involved
here, my own acquaintance is limited, and anyway it isn’t certain that
a secretary to whom such a thing has happened will admit it. It is
always a very personal matter, and to some extent carries the stigma
of oﬃcial shame. However, my experience may prove that it is such a
rare event, really known only by rumour and with nothing else to conﬁrm it, that it would be going much too far to fear it. Even if it ever
really happened you can—or so I should think—render it entirely
harmless by proving, which is easily done, that there is no place for it
in this world. Anyway, it is morbid to hide under the bedclothes for
fear of such a thing, never venturing to look out. And even if that
total improbability were suddenly to assume real form, is all lost? Far
from it. The fact that all is lost is even more improbable than that
most improbable of events. To be sure, if the member of the public
is in the room, that is very bad. It inhibits you. How long will you be
able to resist? you ask yourself. But you know there will be no resistance. You just have to picture the situation in the right way. There
sits the member of the public, whom you have never seen before,
whom you have always awaited, positively thirsting to see him, but
whom you have always, and reasonably, considered inaccessible. His
mere silent presence invites you to enter into his poor life, to move
around there as if it were your own property, to feel sympathy for its
vain demands. This invitation in the silence of the night is captivating.

You accept it, and now you have in fact stopped being an oﬃcial.
It is a situation in which it will soon become impossible to refuse a
request. Strictly speaking you are desperate, but even more
strictly speaking you are very happy. Desperate because the defencelessness with which you sit there waiting for the member of the
public’s request, knowing that once it is made you must grant it,
even if, at least so far as you can see, it positively wrecks the oﬃcial
organization—well, I suppose it is the worst thing that can happen
to you in practice. One reason above all—and apart from everything
else—is that it entails your forcibly claiming a higher rank for yourself at this moment, higher than any you can conceive of. Our positions do not authorize us to grant requests such as those I am talking
about, but what with the nocturnal proximity of the member of the
public our oﬃcial powers seem to grow, we pledge ourselves to do
things outside our sphere of responsibility, indeed, we will even do
them in practice. Like a robber in the forest, a member of the public
surprising us by night forces us to make sacriﬁces of which we would
never otherwise be capable—well, that’s how it is if the member of
the public is still there, encouraging us and forcing us to do so and
spurring us on, and we set it all in train half unconsciously. But how
will it be later, when that’s all over, when the member of the public
goes away, satisﬁed and free of care, and we are left alone, defenceless
in the face of our abuse of oﬃce? It doesn’t bear thinking of. Yet all
the same we are happy. How suicidal happiness can be! We could
make an eﬀort to keep the true situation secret from the member of
the public. The member of the public himself will hardly notice
anything of his own accord. As he sees it, he went into a room which
wasn’t the one he wanted, probably quite by chance, tired out, disappointed, feeling dull and indiﬀerent from weariness and disillusionment, he is sitting there knowing nothing and deep in thoughts, if he
is thinking anything, of his mistake or his weariness. Couldn’t we
leave it at that? No, we can’t. With the loquacity of the happy man,
we must explain it all. Without sparing ourselves in the slightest, we
must show at length what has happened and why, how extraordinarily rare and uniquely great the opportunity is, we must show how the
member of the public who, with all the helplessness of which only a
member of the public can be capable, has walked by chance into
his opportunity, we must show him, Mr Land Surveyor, how the
member of the public can now control everything if he wants to, and

need do nothing but somehow or other make his request, there is a
document for granting it already prepared, we say, ready to be handed
to him—we must go into all that. It is a dark hour for an oﬃcial. But
when you have done that, Mr Land Surveyor, what’s most necessary
has been done, and you must possess your soul in patience and wait.’
K. heard no more. He was asleep, remote from everything that
was going on. His head, which had ﬁrst been laid on his left arm as it
held the bedpost above, had slipped oﬀ in his sleep and now hung
free, sinking gradually lower, for the prop of his arm above it was no
longer enough and K. instinctively created a new one by bracing his
right hand on the blanket, by chance taking hold of Bürgel’s foot just
under the bedclothes. Bürgel looked that way and let him hold the
foot, though it was probably tiresome for him.
Then there were several heavy knocks on the side wall. K. woke
with a start and looked at the wall. ‘Isn’t the land surveyor in there?’
asked a voice. ‘Yes,’ said Bürgel, freeing his foot from K. and suddenly stretching with a wild and wilful movement like a little boy.
‘Then tell him to hurry up and get himself in here,’ said the voice,
without any consideration for Bürgel or for the fact that he might
still need K. ‘That’s Erlanger,’ said Bürgel in a whisper. He did
not seem at all surprised to know that Erlanger was in the next
room. ‘Go straight in to him; he’s in a temper, so you’d better try to
mollify him. He sleeps soundly, but our voices were too loud; when
you’re speaking of certain subjects you can’t really control your
voice. Go along, then, you don’t seem able to wake up properly. Go
on, what more do you want in here? No, no, you don’t have to
apologize for your drowsiness, why should you? Physical strength is
enough only up to a certain point; who can help it if that very point
is also very signiﬁcant otherwise? No one can help it. That’s the way
the world corrects itself in its course and keeps its balance. It’s an
excellent, incredibly excellent arrangement, although dismal in other
respects. Now do run along, I don’t know why you’re staring at me
like that. If you hesitate any longer Erlanger will be down on me like
a ton of bricks, and that’s something I’d much rather avoid. Go on,
who knows what you should expect over there, this place is full of
opportunities. Well, of course there are opportunities too great, in a
certain way, to be exploited; there are things that fail only of their
own volition and for no other reason. Yes, amazing. Anyway, I hope
I can get a little sleep now, though it’s ﬁve in the morning already

and the noise will soon begin. I do wish to goodness you’d go away
at last!’
Dazed from being woken suddenly from deep sleep, still in dire
need of more sleep, his body hurting all over as a result of his uncomfortable position on the bed, K. couldn’t bring himself to stand up
for some time. He clutched his forehead and looked down at his lap.
Even Bürgel’s repeated goodbyes couldn’t get him moving, he was
induced to move only by a sense of the total futility of lingering in
this room any longer. The room seemed to him indescribably bleak.
Whether it had become like that, or had always been like that, he
couldn’t say. He wouldn’t even manage to get to sleep again here.
That conviction was in fact the deciding factor. Smiling at it slightly,
he rose, propping himself against anything he could ﬁnd to support
him, the bed, the wall, the door, and he went out without a word, as
if he had taken leave of Bürgel long ago.

24
He would probably have passed Erlanger’s door with equal indiﬀerence if Erlanger hadn’t been standing in the doorway, crooking his
foreﬁnger to beckon him in. Erlanger was already fully clothed, preparing to leave; he wore a black fur coat with a high-buttoned collar.
A servant was just handing him his gloves, and still held a fur cap.
‘You were supposed to be here long ago,’ Erlanger said. K. was about
to apologize, but by closing his eyes wearily Erlanger showed that he
could do without that. ‘It’s about the following matter,’ he said.
‘There was once a girl called Frieda serving in the bar, I know only
her name, I don’t know the girl herself, I’m not concerned with her.
This Frieda sometimes brought Klamm his beer. There seems to be
another girl there now. The change is of no signiﬁcance, of course,
probably not for anyone and certainly not for Klamm. But the more
important a man’s work, and Klamm’s is certainly the most important of all, the less strength he has left to defend himself against the
outside world, and as a consequence any insigniﬁcant change in the
most insigniﬁcant little things can be seriously disturbing to him.
The smallest change on his desk, the removal of a dirty mark that has
been there for ever, anything like that can upset a man, and so can
the arrival of a new barmaid. Well, of course nothing of the kind
bothers Klamm, there can be no question of that, even if it would
bother anyone else in any line of work you like to mention. All the
same, we are in duty bound to watch over Klamm’s comfort by
removing troublesome factors if they appear to us potentially upsetting, even if they do not, as is very probable, upset him at all. We
remove these troublesome factors not for his sake, not for his work’s
sake, but for our own sake, for the sake of our conscience and peace
of mind. So that girl Frieda must return to the bar at once; perhaps
her return will itself be disturbing, then and only then will we send
her away again, but for the time being, however, she must come back.
I’m told that you are living with her, so kindly make sure she comes
back immediately. Personal feelings must be left out of this, that’s
obvious, so I am not going to enter into any further discussion of it.
I am already doing more than is really necessary if I say that, should

you be of service in this small matter, it could possibly be useful to
you in your further progress. And that is all I have to say to you.’ He
nodded to K. in farewell, put on the fur cap handed to him by his
servant, and went down the corridor, walking fast but with a slight
limp and followed by the servant. Sometimes the orders given here
were very easy to carry out, but K. didn’t like the ease of this one at
all. That was not just because this order concerned Frieda, and
indeed, while it was intended as an order, it sounded to K. like ridicule, but above all because it showed K. how useless all his own
eﬀorts were. Orders were given above his head, the unfavourable and
the favourable alike, and ultimately even the favourable probably had
a nub of something unfavourable in them, but anyway they all went
above his head, and his status was far too low for him to intervene or
actually silence them and get his own voice heard. If Erlanger waves
you away, what will you do, and if he were not to wave you away,
what could you say to him? K. was in fact clear in his own mind that
his weariness had harmed him more today than anything unfavourable in the circumstances, but why could he, who had believed he
could rely on his physical strength and would never have set out
without that conviction, why could he not endure a few disturbed
nights and one without any sleep at all, why was he so uncontrollably
tired here, in this particular place, where no one was ever tired—or
perhaps, more likely, people were always tired without its aﬀecting
their work, but instead seeming to be good for it? You could conclude from that fact that, in its own way, it was a weariness entirely
diﬀerent from K.’s. Here, it was probably weariness in the midst of
enjoyable work, something that from outside looked like weariness
but was really unshakeable calm, unshakeable peace. If you are a little
tired at noon, that’s part of the natural and happy course of the day.
And for the gentlemen here, K. told himself, it’s always noon.
Very much in keeping with that idea, signs of life were now
heard all over the place, on both sides of the corridor, at ﬁve in the
morning. At ﬁrst the babble of voices in the rooms had something
extremely cheerful about it. Sometimes it sounded like the happy
shouting of children getting ready for an outing, or then again
like chickens waking up in the henhouse, a joyful noise just right
for the dawning day. Somewhere or other, one of the gentlemen
was even imitating the crowing of a cockerel. The corridor itself was
still empty, but the doors were beginning to move. They kept being

opened just a little way and quickly closed again, there was a positive
percussion of such opening and closing of doors in the corridor, and
now and then, looking through the gaps where the walls didn’t reach
the ceiling, K. saw tousled morning heads appear, only to disappear
next minute. In the distance, a small trolley laden with ﬁles was being
slowly pushed along by a servant. A second servant walked beside
him with a list in his hand, obviously comparing the numbers on the
doors with numbers on the ﬁles. The trolley stopped outside most of
the doors, and then usually the door was opened and the relevant
ﬁles handed into the room, or sometimes just a note—in such cases
a little conversation would go on between the room and the corridor,
probably a gentleman telling the servant oﬀ. If the door stayed closed
its ﬁles were carefully piled up just outside it. When that happened
it seemed to K. as if the movement of the doors around him was no
less, although the ﬁles had been distributed, but even increased.
Perhaps the others were looking longingly at the ﬁles which were
lying outside the door and, for some incomprehensible reason,
hadn’t been taken in yet; they couldn’t understand how someone
who had only to open his door to lay hands on his ﬁles didn’t do so.
Perhaps it was even possible that ﬁles which remained lying about
would be distributed later to the other gentlemen, who were already
looking out at frequent intervals to see whether the ﬁles were still
outside the door, meaning that there was still hope for themselves.
Furthermore, the ﬁles left lying there were usually in particularly
large bundles, and K. assumed that they had been left where they
were for now either out of a certain malicious desire to show oﬀ, or
for motives of well-justiﬁed pride intended to encourage the colleagues of the gentleman in the room. He was conﬁrmed in this
assumption by the fact that sometimes—always when he didn’t happen to be looking—after the stack of ﬁles had been on show long
enough, it was suddenly and very quickly snapped up and taken into
the room, and the door then remained closed as before. The doors all
around calmed down at that point, either disappointed or pleased to
see that such a provocative item had ﬁnally been removed, but then
they slowly began moving again.
K. saw all this with interest as well as curiosity. He felt almost happy
in the midst of this stir and bustle, looking this way and that, following
the servants, though keeping a suitable distance behind, and indeed
they had often turned to look at him with a stern glance, lowered

heads, and pouting lips, as he observed their work of distribution.
The longer it lasted the less smoothly did it go; either the list wasn’t
perfectly accurate, or the servants couldn’t always tell one ﬁle from
another very well, or the gentlemen made objections for other reasons, but at any rate, it turned out that many of the ﬁles already
distributed had to be returned, and then the little trolley went back
and negotiations about the return of the ﬁles took place through the
crack where the door stood ajar. These negotiations themselves were
full of problems, but it quite often happened that when something
had to be returned, doors that had been in the liveliest movement
earlier were now ﬁrmly shut, as if they didn’t want to know anything
about what was going on. Only then did the real problems begin.
The gentleman who thought he had a claim to the ﬁles would wax
extremely impatient, make a great deal of noise in his room, clapping
his hands, stamping his feet, and repeatedly calling the number of a
certain ﬁle out into the passage. Then the trolley was often left abandoned. One of the servants would be busy mollifying the impatient
gentleman, while the other stood outside a closed door ﬁghting for
the return of the ﬁle. Both servants had a hard time of it. Attempts
to placate the impatient gentleman often made him even more impatient, he wouldn’t listen to the servant’s empty words any longer, he
didn’t want consolation, he wanted ﬁles. One such gentleman poured
a whole bowlful of water over the servant through the gap at the top
of his door. But the other servant, obviously higher-ranking, had an
even worse time. If the gentleman concerned would enter into negotiations at all, discussions of the facts ensued, in which the servant
cited his list, while the gentleman cited his notes and the actual ﬁles
that he was supposed to return, but was now clutching so ﬁrmly that
hardly a corner of them was still visible to the servant’s avid eyes.
Then the servant had to go back to the trolley for more evidence. By
now it had run on of its own accord down the slight slope of the corridor, or he had to go after the gentleman who was claiming the ﬁles
and exchange the protests of the gentleman currently in possession
of them for a new set of counter-protests. Such negotiations went on
for a very long time, and sometimes it was agreed that the gentleman
would give back a part of the ﬁles, or would be given a diﬀerent ﬁle
in compensation, since they had only been mixed up. But it sometimes happened that a gentleman had to give up all the ﬁles demanded
at once, whether because the evidence produced by the servant had

driven him into a corner, or because he was tired of the constant
bargaining. Then he didn’t hand them to the servant but instead,
with a sudden decisive gesture, threw them a long way down the corridor, so that the string tying them together came oﬀ, sheets of paper
ﬂew around, and the servants had great trouble putting everything
back in order. However, all this was relatively simpler than when the
servant got no answer at all when he went to ask for the ﬁles back;
then he stood outside the closed door, begging and pleading, citing
his list, calling on the regulations, all in vain, for not a sound came
from inside the room, and obviously the servant had no right to enter
it without permission. Then even this model servant sometimes lost
his self-control and went to his little trolley, sat down on the ﬁles,
wiped the sweat from his brow, and did nothing at all for a while but
dangle his feet helplessly in the air. All around him, great interest
was shown in that, there was much whispering, scarcely a door
remained still, and up along the tops of the walls faces, curiously
enough almost entirely wrapped in scarves, followed all that was
going on, but never stayed where they were for long. In the midst of
all this turmoil K. noticed that Bürgel’s door had remained closed
the whole time, and the servants had passed down that part of the
corridor already, but no ﬁles had been handed out to Bürgel. Perhaps
he was still asleep, and what with all the racket that would have meant
his sleep was sound and very healthy, but why had he not been given
any ﬁles? Only a very few rooms had been passed over in that way,
and they were probably empty. On the other hand, there was already
a new and particularly restless guest in what had been Erlanger’s
room. Erlanger must have been positively driven out by him in the
night, which would not have suited Erlanger’s own cool and downto-earth nature, but the fact that he had been obliged to wait for K.
in the doorway of the room suggested that such was the case.
K. kept coming back from all these other observations to the servant; what he had been told about the servants in general—their
laziness, the comfortable life they led, their arrogance—certainly
didn’t apply to this one. There must be exceptions among the servants
too, or more probably there were diﬀerent groups of servants, for here,
as K. noticed, there were demarcations of which he had previously
seen hardly any hint. In particular he admired the unyielding determination of this servant. The servant was not giving up in his battle with
these obstinate little rooms—to K. it often seemed a battle with the

rooms themselves, since he hardly saw anything of their occupants.
He felt tired, to be sure—who wouldn’t have felt tired?—but he
would soon pull himself together, slip down from the trolley, and
make for the door that must be conquered, walking very erect and
clenching his jaws grimly. And it could happen that he was beaten
back two or three times by very simple means, simply by the dreadful
silence inside the room, and yet was not overcome. When he saw that
open attack was no good he tried something diﬀerent, for instance,
so far as K. could make out, he tried cunning. He would appear to go
away from the door, letting it exhaust its powers of silence, so to
speak, and turn to other doors, but after a while he would come back,
call in a loud and very audible voice to the other servant, and begin
piling ﬁles outside the closed door as if he had changed his mind, and
there was nothing to be rightfully taken away from the gentleman,
instead he was to get more ﬁles. Then he went on, but kept his eye
on the door, and if the gentleman inside, as usually happened, soon
cautiously opened the door to take in the new ﬁles, the servant was
there in a ﬂash, wedged his foot in the doorway, and obliged the
gentleman at least to negotiate with him face to face, which usually
brought the argument to a conclusion that was at least partly satisfactory. And if that didn’t work, or it didn’t appear to him the best way
to approach a certain door, he would try yet another trick. He moved
on, for instance, to the gentleman claiming the ﬁles. Then he would
push aside the other servant, who was still mechanically distributing
ﬁles and was not much of a help to him, and begin persuading the
gentleman himself, whispering in conspiratorial tones with his head
well inside the room, probably making promises and giving assurances that next time ﬁles were distributed the other gentleman would
meet with proper retribution, at least he pointed frequently at the
door of the ﬁrst gentleman’s opponent, laughing as far as his weariness would allow. But then there were cases, one or two of them,
where he simply gave up any attempt, although even here K. thought
he was only appearing to give up, or at least giving up on reasonable
grounds, for he went calmly on, putting up with the noise made by a
gentleman who felt badly treated, and only the way he sometimes
closed his eyes for quite a while showed that he suﬀered from the
racket. But the gentleman would gradually calm down, and his protests were made less often, just as the uninterrupted crying of children
gradually turns to isolated sobs. But even after he had fallen silent

there was still an occasional screech from his room, or its door was
swiftly opened and slammed again. At least it turned out that here
the servant had probably done just the right thing. In the end there
was only one gentleman left who would not calm down; he remained
silent for a long time, but only to get his breath back, and then he
started up again, making just as much fuss as before. It was not quite
clear why he was shouting and complaining like that; perhaps it
wasn’t to do with the distribution of the ﬁles at all. By now the servant had ﬁnished his work, and there was only a single ﬁle, or really
just a piece of paper torn from a notepad, left on the trolley; that was
the other servant’s fault. An idea went through K.’s head: why, he
thought, that could very well be my ﬁle. The village mayor had called
his a very minor case. And K., however random and ridiculous his
assumption seemed even to himself, tried to approach the servant,
who was looking thoughtfully at the sheet of paper. However, that
wasn’t easy, for the servant did not react well to the interest that K.
was taking in him; even in the middle of his hardest work he had
always found time to look round at K. with an angry or impatient and
nervous jerk of his head. Only now that the ﬁles were distributed did
he seem to have forgotten K. for the moment, and seemed indiﬀerent, which his exhaustion made understandable. He wasn’t taking
much trouble with the sheet of paper either, perhaps he wasn’t even
reading it, just looking as if he was, and although he would probably
have made any of the gentlemen in the rooms happy by giving them
this sheet of paper, he decided not to. He was tired of distributing
ﬁles. With his foreﬁnger to his lips, he signed to his companion to
keep quiet, and then—K. was nowhere near him yet—tore up the
sheet of paper into small pieces and put it in his pocket. This was the
ﬁrst irregularity that K. had seen in all the oﬃce business here,
although it was possible that he had misunderstood it. And even if it
had been an irregularity, it could be forgiven, considering the circumstances; the servant could not work ﬂawlessly all the time, a
point must come when his accumulated annoyance and uneasiness
must break out, and venting it simply by tearing up a small sheet of
paper was innocent enough. The voice of the gentleman who wasn’t
to be molliﬁed was still echoing down the corridor, and his colleagues, who in other respects didn’t behave in a very friendly way to
each other, seemed to be all of the same opinion about the noise he
was making. It was coming to seem as if the gentleman had assumed

the task of making enough noise for them all, and their shouts and
nods of the head merely encouraged him to go on with it. But now it
didn’t bother the servant any more; he had ﬁnished his work, and
taking hold of the trolley signed to the other servant to do the same,
so they wheeled it away again just as they had come, only more contentedly, and so fast that the trolley jolted along in front of them.
Only once did they stop suddenly and look back, when the shouting
gentleman outside whose door K. was now wandering around—he
would have liked to know what the gentleman really wanted—had
obviously deciding that screaming was getting him nowhere. He
seemed to have found an electric bell-push, and in his delight at
being relieved in this way began ringing the bell continuously instead
of screaming. Thereupon loud murmuring, which seemed to indicate approval, came from the other rooms. The gentleman appeared
to be doing something they would all have liked to do for a long time,
and had been obliged to leave undone only for some unknown reason. Was it perhaps the servants, was it perhaps Frieda that the
gentleman hoped to summon by ringing? He would have to wait a
long time. Frieda was probably busy wrapping Jeremias in wet towels, and even if he was better by now she wouldn’t have the time to
come, for then she would be lying in his arms. But the ringing of the
bell did have an immediate eﬀect. The landlord of the Castle Inn
himself came hurrying up from a distance, clad in black and neatly
buttoned up as usual, but the way he ran suggested that he was forgetting his dignity. His arms were half outstretched as if he had been
called to the scene of some great disaster, and was prepared to seize
the cause of it, clamp it to his chest, and so stiﬂe it, and with every
little irregularity in the ringing of the bell he seemed to jump in the
air for a moment and then hurry even faster. And now his wife also
appeared, a long way behind him. She too was running with her arms
outstretched, but her steps were small and dainty, and K. thought
she would arrive too late; the landlord would have dealt with everything before she got there. K. pressed close to the wall to give the
landlord room to run by. But the landlord stopped right in front of
him, as if K. himself were his destination, and next moment the
landlady was there too, both of them heaping reproaches on him
which in all the haste and surprise he didn’t understand, particularly
as the gentleman’s bell joined in as well, and other bells began
ringing too, not with any sense of emergency now but just for fun

and in an excess of high spirits. Since K. was very anxious to discover
exactly what he had done wrong, he was perfectly happy for the
landlord to take his arm and frogmarch him away from all this noise,
which was getting louder and louder, for behind them—K. didn’t
turn to look, because the landlord was talking to him, and the landlady on his other side was talking even more—behind them the
doors now opened wide, the corridor was teeming with life, there
seemed to be coming and going as if it were a narrow but busy alley,
the doors ahead of them were obviously waiting impatiently for K. to
come past, so that they could let the gentlemen inside those rooms
out, and through all this the bells rang as the gentlemen pushed them
again and again, as if to celebrate a victory. And now at last—they
were in the quiet white yard again, where several sleighs were
waiting—did K. gradually gather what it was all about. Neither the
landlord nor the landlady understood how K. could have done anything of the kind. But what exactly had he done? K. asked again and
again, although he didn’t get the chance to ask for long, because his
guilt was only too obvious to both of them, and they didn’t believe
for a moment that he was asking in good faith. Only bit by bit did K.
ﬁnd out what the matter was. He had no right to be in the corridor,
in general he could enter only the bar, and that only as a favour which
could be withdrawn. If he had been summoned to see a gentleman,
he must of course go to the place to which he had been summoned,
but must always remain aware—he did have his wits about him, they
imagined, like anyone else?—that he was somewhere where he did
not belong, to which he had been summoned only by a gentleman,
and very unwillingly at that, merely because oﬃcial business required
and justiﬁed it. He therefore had to turn up quickly, go through his
hearing, and then disappear, even more quickly if possible. Hadn’t
he felt how very wrong it was for him to be there in the corridor? And
if he had, then how could he have gone wandering around there like
an animal out at pasture? Hadn’t he been summoned to a nocturnal
hearing, and didn’t he know why such hearings were held at night?
Such hearings—and here K. did get a new explanation of the point
of them—were held at night with the sole purpose of questioning
members of the public the sight of whom would be entirely intolerable to the gentlemen by day, thus getting through the hearing quickly,
by night and in artiﬁcial light, so that directly it was over the gentlemen could forget all that unpleasantness in slumber. K.’s conduct,

however, had made a mockery of all these precautionary measures.
Even ghosts disappear when morning comes, but K. had stayed there
with his hands in his pockets, as if expecting that if he did not
remove himself the entire corridor might remove itself instead,
rooms and gentlemen and all. And he could be sure, they said, that
just that would have happened if it had only been possible, for the
gentlemen’s feelings were extremely sensitive. None of them would
drive K. away, or even say, which was obvious, that he ought to go
away, none of them would do that, although they were probably
trembling with agitation all the time K. was there and spoiling the
morning for them, their best time of day. Instead of taking any proceedings to get rid of K. they preferred to suﬀer in silence, although
no doubt hoping that K. would ﬁnally see what was so strikingly
obvious, when he himself would suﬀer to the point where the pain of
it was intolerable and matched the gentlemen’s own suﬀering, for it
was so very wrong to be standing here in the corridor in the morning,
where everyone could see him. But such hopes had been in vain. The
gentlemen didn’t know, or in their kindness and condescension
wouldn’t acknowledge, that there might be insensitive, hard hearts
which could not be softened even by proper respect. Doesn’t even
the night-ﬂying moth, poor creature, seek out a quiet corner when
day comes, ﬂatten itself as if it would like to disappear, and suﬀer
because it can’t? But as for K., oh no, he stands where he is most
conspicuous, and if he could prevent day from dawning like that then
he would. Well, he can’t prevent it, but he could, unfortunately,
delay it and make it much worse. Hadn’t he seen the ﬁles being distributed? It was something that no one was allowed to see except
those most closely concerned. Something that neither the landlord
nor the landlady could witness in their own house. Something of
which they had heard tell only in hints, like those dropped today by
the servant. Hadn’t he seen the diﬃculties attendant on the distribution of the ﬁles, something in itself beyond understanding, since
every one of the gentlemen was simply serving the good cause, never
thought of his own advantage, and must work with all his powers to
ensure that the distribution of the ﬁles, that important and fundamental part of the work, was done quickly, easily, and without any
errors? And hadn’t K. really had even a distant presentiment that the
main point of all the diﬃculties consisted in the fact that the distribution of the ﬁles must take place with the doors almost closed, with no

possibility of direct communication between the gentlemen, who
could of course have agreed with one another in an instant, while
communication through the servants was bound to drag on almost
for hours, could never be done without complaints, which was a
constant trial to both the gentlemen and the servants, and one which
would probably have adverse consequences for the rest of the work
done later. Why couldn’t the gentlemen communicate with one
another directly? Did K. still not understand? Such a thing had
never before happened to the landlady, she said—and the landlord
conﬁrmed it for himself—even though they had been obliged to deal
with all kinds of recalcitrant persons. Things that one usually dared
not mention must be told to him openly, for otherwise he wouldn’t
understand the most essential point. Well, since it had to be said: it
was on his account, only and exclusively on his account, that the
gentlemen had not been able to come out of their rooms, since just
after waking up in the morning they were too bashful, too vulnerable,
to be exposed to the glance of strange eyes, they feel positively too
exposed to show themselves, even if they happen to be fully clothed.
It is diﬃcult to say why they feel bashful, perhaps, constant workers
as they are, they were just ashamed of having gone to sleep. But
perhaps they are even more bashful when it comes to seeing strangers than they feel about being seen themselves, and they do not now
want to be suddenly and immediately confronted, ﬁrst thing in the
morning, with the distressing sight of members of the public, large
as life and twice as natural, a sight that, fortunately, they have managed to overcome with the help of the nocturnal hearings. They are
just not equal to it. And what kind of a human being wouldn’t
respect that? Well, someone like K. Someone who would set himself
above everything, above the law, above the most ordinary human
consideration for others, and do it with dull indiﬀerence and lethargy, someone who doesn’t mind making the distribution of the ﬁles
all but impossible, who harms the reputation of their inn, and is the
cause of something never known before: the gentlemen, driven to
distraction, begin to defend themselves, and after summoning up
what to ordinary people is almost unimaginable will-power, reach for
their bells and ring for help in getting rid of K., since there is no other
way of doing it. They, the gentlemen, calling for help! Wouldn’t the
landlord and landlady and all their staﬀ have come long before if
they had only dared to appear before the gentlemen in the morning

without being summoned, even if it was only to bring help and then
go away at once? Quivering with their indignation at K.’s conduct,
inconsolable at being so powerless, they had waited here at the beginning of the corridor, and the ringing of the bell that they had never
really expected had been such a release for them! Well, the worst was
over! If only they could get a glimpse of the happiness of the gentlemen now that they were ﬁnally delivered from K.! It wasn’t over yet
for K. himself, of course, he would certainly have to answer for what
he had done.
By now they had reached the bar; why the landlord, for all his
anger, had brought K. here was not entirely clear, but perhaps he had
realized that K.’s exhaustion made it impossible for him to leave the
house at once. Without waiting to be asked to sit down, K. positively
collapsed on to one of the casks. It was good to be there in the dark.
Only one weak electric light above the beer-pulls was switched on. It
was still dark outside too, and there seemed to be driving snow. He
must be thankful to be here in the warm and take care not to be
driven out. The landlord and landlady went on standing in front of
him as if he still represented imminent danger, as if he were so totally
unreliable that they couldn’t entirely exclude the possibility of his
suddenly setting out to try getting back into the corridor. They were
tired themselves after the nocturnal alarms and rising early, especially
the landlady, who was wearing a wide-skirted brown dress that rustled like silk, and was rather carelessly buttoned and done up—where
had she found it in her haste?—and had now laid her head on her
husband’s shoulder, was dabbing her eyes with a delicate little handkerchief, now and then, like a child, casting angry glances at K. To
mollify the couple, K. said that everything they had told him was
entirely new to him, but that even though he had not been aware of
it he would never have stayed so long in the corridor, where he really
had no business and certainly no desire to upset anyone, except that
he was so exhausted. He thanked them, he said, for putting an end to
the painful scene. If he was to be called to account for it, he would
welcome that, for only in that way could he prevent his conduct from
being generally misunderstood. His weariness was solely to blame,
nothing else. But that weariness arose from his not being used to the
strain of the hearings. After all, he hadn’t been here very long. Once
he had some experience of it nothing of the kind could happen again.
Perhaps he took the hearings too seriously, but surely that wasn’t a

bad thing in itself. He had been through two hearings in quick succession, one with Bürgel and the second with Erlanger, and the ﬁrst
in particular had worn him out, although the second hadn’t taken
long, Erlanger had simply wanted to ask him a favour, but both
together had been more than he could stand at once, perhaps something of the kind might be too much for others too, even the landlord. He had staggered away from the second hearing in what was
almost a state of intoxication—after all, he had seen and heard the
two gentlemen for the ﬁrst time, and had been expected to answer
them. As far as he knew it had all turned out well, but then the misfortune had happened, although he could hardly be held to blame for
it after what had gone before. Unfortunately only Erlanger and
Bürgel had seen the condition he was in, and he was sure they would
have spoken up for him and averted anything unfortunate, but
Erlanger had had to leave directly after the hearing, obviously to go
to the castle, and Bürgel, probably tired after the hearing himself—so
how could K. have survived it unaﬀected?—had gone to sleep and
even slept through the distribution of the ﬁles. If a similar opportunity had come K.’s way he would happily have taken it, thus avoiding
all glimpses of anything forbidden, and that would have been all the
easier in that he really had been in no state to see anything, so even
the most sensitive of the gentlemen could have shown themselves in
front of him without fear.
The mention of the two hearings, particularly the one with
Erlanger, and the respect with which K. spoke of the two gentlemen,
made the landlord more inclined to tolerate him. He seemed about to
agree to K.’s request to let him put a plank on the casks and sleep
there at least until daylight came, but the landlady was clearly against
it, and kept tugging uselessly here and there at her dress, the disorder
of which she seemed to have noticed only now, and shaking her head
again and again. What was obviously a long-standing argument about
the cleanliness of the house seemed about to break out again. To K.,
weary as he was, the conversation between husband and wife took on
enormous importance. To be driven away from here seemed a misfortune greater than any he had yet known. It must not happen, even
if the landlord and landlady were to unite against him. Slumped on
the cask, he watched the two of them warily. Until the landlady, in
her own unusual sensitivity, which K. had noticed long ago, suddenly
stepped aside and cried out—she had probably just been talking to

the landlord about something else—‘See how he’s looking at me!
Send him away, do!’ But K., seizing his opportunity, and now feeling
sure, almost to the point of indiﬀerence, that he would be staying,
said: ‘I’m not looking at you, I’m only looking at your dress.’ ‘Why
my dress?’ asked the agitated landlady. K. just shrugged. ‘Come
along,’ the landlady told the landlord. ‘He’s drunk, the lout. Leave
him here to sleep it oﬀ.’ And she told Pepi, who at her call emerged
from the darkness looking tired and tousled, with a broom held listlessly in her hand, to throw K. a cushion or so.

25
When K. woke up he thought at ﬁrst that he had hardly slept at all;
the room was just the same, warm and empty, all the walls in darkness, but with that one electric light above the beer-pulls, and night
outside the windows. But when he stretched, the cushion fell to the
ﬂoor, and the board and casks creaked, Pepi arrived at once, and now
he discovered that it was evening and he had slept for over twelve
hours. The landlady had asked after him several times during the
day, and Gerstäcker, who had been sitting here over a beer in the
dark when K. spoke to the landlady in the morning but hadn’t liked
to disturb him, had also looked in once to see how he was. Finally, it
appeared that Frieda too had come in, and stood beside K. for a little
while, but she hadn’t really come on his account, only because she
had several things to get ready here before returning to her old job
that evening. ‘I suppose she doesn’t fancy you any more?’ asked Pepi,
as she brought coﬀee and cakes. However, she asked not in her old
malicious way but sadly, as if now she had come to know the malice
of the world for herself, and beside it any personal malice pales and
loses its point; she spoke to K. like a companion in misfortune, and
when he tasted the coﬀee and she thought she saw that it wasn’t
sweet enough for him, she went oﬀ and brought him the full sugarbowl. It was true that her melancholy had not kept her from decking
herself out today even more extravagantly, perhaps, than last time K.
had seen her; she wore a profusion of bows and ribbons threaded
through her hair, which she had carefully arranged with curlingtongs over her forehead and temples. Around her neck she wore a
necklace hanging down into the low-cut neck of her blouse. When
K., feeling glad to have had a long sleep and some good coﬀee, surreptitiously took hold of one of the bows and tried to undo it, Pepi
said wearily: ‘Leave me alone,’ and sat down on a cask beside him. K.
didn’t have to ask why she was unhappy, for she began telling him at
once, her gaze ﬁxed on K.’s coﬀee-pot as if she needed something to
distract her mind as she told him about it, as if even when she
thought about her suﬀering it was more than she could do to give
herself up to it entirely. First K. discovered that he himself was to

blame for Pepi’s unhappiness, but she didn’t bear him a grudge for
that, she said. And she nodded eagerly as she told her tale, to keep K.
from contradicting anything. First he had taken Frieda away from
the bar and thus made it possible for Pepi to rise to the position of
barmaid. She, Pepi, could think of nothing else that might have
induced Frieda to give up her post; she sat there in the bar like a
spider in its web, casting her threads far and wide as only she could;
it would have been impossible to remove her against her will, only
love for someone of low status, a love that was unﬁt for her position,
could drive her from it. And what about Pepi? Had she ever aspired
to such a post for herself ? She was a chambermaid, she had an insigniﬁcant job with few prospects, like every other girl she dreamed of
a wonderful future, you can’t forbid anyone to dream, but she didn’t
seriously expect to get very far, she had come to terms with what she
had already attained. And then Frieda suddenly left the bar, so suddenly that the landlord didn’t have a suitable replacement to hand,
he looked around and his eye fell on Pepi, who had certainly done her
own part here by putting herself forward. At that time she loved K.
as she had never loved anyone before, she had been living for months
in her tiny, dark room down below, and expected to spend years
there, her whole life if the worst came to the worst, with no one paying her any attention, and then along came K. all of a sudden, a hero,
a deliverer of maidens, and he had opened the way for her to rise.
Not that he knew anything about her, he hadn’t done it for her sake,
but that didn’t make her any less grateful. On the night when she was
appointed barmaid—the appointment wasn’t certain yet, but it was
very probable—she spent hours talking to him, whispering her
thanks into his ear. What he had done seemed even greater to her
because the burden he had taken on his own shoulders was Frieda,
there was something amazingly unselﬁsh in the fact that to free Pepi
from her predicament he was making Frieda his mistress, an unattractive thin girl not as young as she used to be, with short, sparse
hair, a sly girl too, who always had secrets of some kind, just the
thing you might expect from her appearance; although her face and
body were undoubtedly a miserable sight, she must at least have had
other secrets that no one could know about, perhaps to do with her
alleged relationship with Klamm. At the time, Pepi even entertained
ideas like this: was it possible that K. really loved Frieda, wasn’t he
deceiving himself, or was he perhaps deceiving no one but Frieda,

and would the only result of all this be just Pepi’s rise in the world?
Would K. see his mistake then, or stop trying to hide it, and take
notice of Pepi instead of Frieda? That wasn’t such a wild idea of
Pepi’s, for as one girl against another she could hold her own against
Frieda very well, no one would deny that, and it had been primarily
Frieda’s position as barmaid and the lustre with which Frieda had
managed to endow it that had dazzled K. at the moment when he met
her. And then Pepi had dreamed that when she had the position
herself K. would come to plead with her, and she would have the
choice of either listening to K. and losing the job, or turning him
down and rising higher. She had worked it out that she would give
up everything and lower herself to his level, and teach him the true
love that he could never know with Frieda, the love that is independent of all the grand positions in the world. But then it all turned out
diﬀerently. And what was to blame for that? K. ﬁrst and foremost,
and then of course Frieda’s crafty, sly nature. K. ﬁrst, said Pepi,
because just what did he want, what strange kind of person was he?
What was he after, what important matters occupied his mind to
make him forget all that was closest to him, all that was best and most
beautiful? Pepi was the victim in all this, everything was stupid, all
was lost, and if there was a man with the strength of mind to set ﬁre
to the whole Castle Inn and burn it to the ground, leaving no trace,
like a piece of paper in the stove, he would be the man of Pepi’s
dreams today. Well, so Pepi came to work in the bar, she went on,
four days ago just before lunchtime. It’s not easy work here, she said,
in fact it’s murder, but you could do a lot for yourself. Pepi never
used to live in the moment, and although in her wildest dreams she
wouldn’t have thought of rising to occupy the post of barmaid herself, she’d kept her eyes open, she knew what the job was like, she
hadn’t been unprepared when she took it on. You can’t take a post
on unprepared, or you’d lose it in the ﬁrst few hours. Particularly if
you behaved the way the chambermaids here did. When you’re a
chambermaid you feel forgotten and forlorn, it’s like working down
the mine, or at least it is in the corridor where the secretaries stay,
you don’t see a soul for days on end except for a few members of the
public ﬂitting back and forth, never venturing to look up, no one but
the two or three other chambermaids who feel just as bitter about
their lot. You can’t leave your room in the morning, the secretaries
want to be on their own, the servants bring their food from the

kitchen, the chambermaids don’t usually have anything to do with
that, and you can’t show yourself in the corridor at mealtimes either.
It’s only while the gentlemen are working that the chambermaids are
allowed to tidy up, not of course in the rooms that are occupied but
in those that happen to be empty, and the housework has to be done
very quietly so as not to disturb the gentlemen at their work. But how
can anyone clean and tidy quietly if the gentlemen stay in their rooms
day after day, and then there are the servants going around, dirty
riﬀraﬀ that they are, and when a room is ﬁnally free for the chambermaid to go in, it’s in such a state that not even a deluge could wash it
clean? It’s true that the gentlemen who come here are very ﬁne, but
you have a hard time of it mastering your disgust so that you can
clean up after them. The chambermaids don’t have too much work,
but what there is of it is tough going. And never a word of praise,
only blame, particularly the frequent and vexatious accusation that
ﬁles have been lost while you were clearing up. In fact nothing is ever
lost, every tiny piece of paper is handed in to the landlord; well, ﬁles
do get lost, yes, but it’s not the maids’ fault. And then commissions
of inquiry come along and the maids have to leave their room and the
commission of inquiry takes their beds apart; the maids don’t have
any possessions, their few things ﬁt into a pannier you can carry on
your back, but the commission of inquiry spends hours searching all
the same. Of course it never ﬁnds anything; how would ﬁles get into
the maids’ rooms? What would the maids do with ﬁles? But once
again the result is angry scolding and threats on the part of the disappointed commission of inquiry, conveyed only through the landlord.
And never any peace—not by day or by night. Noise half the night,
noise from ﬁrst thing in the morning. If only the chambermaids at
least didn’t have to live there, but they must, because it’s their business to bring small things ordered from the kitchen in between times,
particularly at night. Again and again you hear that sudden banging
of a ﬁst on the chambermaids’ door, the order is dictated, you run
down to the kitchen, you shake the sleeping kitchen-boys awake, you
leave the tray of whatever has been ordered outside the chambermaids’
door, from which the gentlemen’s servants fetch it—how dreary it all
is. But that’s not the worst. The worst is when there are no orders and
in the middle of the night, when everyone ought to be asleep, and most
people really do get to sleep in the end, you sometimes hear someone
slinking around outside the chambermaids’ door. Then the maids get

out of bed—the beds are above each other, there’s very little space
anywhere there; the whole room where the maids sleep is really no
more than a big cupboard with three compartments—they listen at
the door, they kneel down, they clutch one another in fear. And you
keep hearing that person slinking about outside the door. Everyone
would be glad if he ﬁnally did come in, but nothing happens, no one
comes in. You have to remind yourself that there isn’t necessarily
any danger, perhaps it’s just someone pacing up and down, wondering whether to order something and unable to make up his mind.
Well, perhaps that’s all it is, but perhaps it’s something quite diﬀerent. The chambermaids don’t really know the gentlemen at all,
they’ve hardly set eyes on them. Anyway, the maids inside the room
are half dead with fear, and when at last it’s quiet again outside they
lean against the wall without even enough strength to get back into
bed. And that was the life waiting for Pepi; this very evening, she
said, she was to move back to her old place in the maids’ room. And
why? Because of K. and Frieda. Back to the life she’d barely escaped,
escaped with K.’s help, to be sure, but also by dint of her own diligent eﬀorts. Because the maids on duty down there, even the most
fastidious, do tend to neglect themselves. Who would they be prettifying themselves for? No one sees them, at most the kitchen staﬀ,
well, maybe a maid who’s satisﬁed with that will prettify herself. But
otherwise they are in their little room, or in the gentlemen’s rooms,
and again it would be silly and a waste of time to enter those rooms
in neat, clean clothes. And you’re always in artiﬁcial light and stuﬀy
air—the heating is always on—and always dead tired. The best way
to spend your one free afternoon a week is to ﬁnd some quiet place
near the kitchen where you can sleep undisturbed and without fear.
So why make yourself pretty? You hardly bother even to dress. And
then—then Pepi was suddenly moved to the bar where the very
opposite was necessary if you wanted to hold your ground, where
you were always before other people’s eyes, those people including
some very ﬁnicky and observant gentlemen, and where you must
always look as ﬁne and pleasant as possible. Well, that was a great
change! And Pepi might boast that she left nothing undone. How
things turned out later didn’t worry Pepi. She knew she had the
abilities necessary for the job, she was sure of it, she is still convinced
of it now and no one can take that conviction away from her, even
today, the day of her defeat. The only diﬃcult bit was knowing how

to prove herself at ﬁrst, because she was a poor chambermaid without
nice clothes and jewellery, and the gentlemen don’t have the patience
to hang about and see how you grow into the job, they want a proper
barmaid at once, without any in-between period, or they’ll go somewhere else. You might think their demands weren’t very great if
Frieda could satisfy them. But that wasn’t so. Pepi had often thought
about it, she said, had often been in Frieda’s company, even shared
a bed with her for a while. It wasn’t easy to make Frieda out, and
anyone who didn’t study her very closely—and what gentleman is
going to study a barmaid very closely?—would easily be led astray.
No one knows better than Frieda herself how pathetic she looks; for
instance, when you ﬁrst see her let her hair down you clasp your
hands in pity; a girl like that ought not really to be even a chambermaid; she knows it too, and she has cried her eyes out over it many a
night, pressing close to Pepi and winding Pepi’s hair around her own
head. But when she was serving in the bar all her doubts were gone,
she considered herself a beauty and knew how to make everyone
think so too. She knows what people are like, that’s her real art. And
she is a quick liar, and deceptive, so that people don’t have time to
look at her more closely. Of course that won’t work forever, people
do have eyes, and after all their eyes would tell them the truth. But
when Frieda realized there was a danger of that she had something
else up her sleeve, most recently, for instance, her relationship with
Klamm. Her relationship with Klamm! If you don’t believe me, you
can go to Klamm and ask him, said Pepi. How clever, how cunning.
And if you daren’t go to see Klamm on that kind of subject, maybe
you wouldn’t be let in to see him on far more important business, if
Klamm is entirely inaccessible—though only to you and your like,
because Frieda, for instance, can pop in and see him whenever she
wants—well, if that’s the case, you still can ﬁnd out, you’d think you
only had to wait. Klamm wouldn’t allow such a false rumour to circulate for long, he really likes to know what’s said about him in the
bar and the guest-rooms, all that is very important to him, and if it’s
false he’ll soon put it right. But he hasn’t put it right, so people think
there’s nothing to put right and it is the truth. What you see is only
Frieda taking the beer to Klamm’s room and coming out again with
the payment, but Frieda tells you what you haven’t seen, and you
have to believe her. Although in fact she doesn’t tell you, she
wouldn’t reveal such mysteries, no, the secrets spread of their own

accord around her, and once they’ve spread she doesn’t shrink from
speaking of them herself, but in a modest way, without claiming
anything, just referring to what’s common knowledge. Not to everything, for instance not that Klamm drank less beer than before since
she was serving in the bar, not much less, but distinctly less, she
doesn’t talk about that, and there could be various reasons; it could
be that a time came when Klamm didn’t like beer so much, or that
Frieda made him forget about drinking beer. Anyway, surprising as
it may be, let’s say Frieda was Klamm’s mistress. But if someone is
good enough for Klamm, why wouldn’t others admire her too? So
Frieda became a great beauty, just like that, the kind of girl that’s
needed in the bar, almost too beautiful, too powerful, soon the bar
would hardly be enough for her. And sure enough, it seemed strange
to people that she was still in the bar; it’s a great thing to be a barmaid, and from that point of view her connection with Klamm
seemed very credible, but if the barmaid is Klamm’s mistress, why
did he leave her in the bar for so long? Why didn’t he promote her to
better things? You can tell people a thousand times that there was
nothing contradictory about this, that Klamm had his reasons for
acting in such a way, or that some time, perhaps very soon, Frieda’s
promotion would come. None of that had much eﬀect; people get
certain ideas and in the long term they won’t be persuaded otherwise, not by any arts. No one doubted that Frieda was Klamm’s
lover, even those who obviously knew better were too tired to doubt
it. ‘For heaven’s sake, call yourself Klamm’s lover then,’ they
thought, ‘but if you really are we’ll notice by your rise in the world.’
However, no one noticed anything, and Frieda stayed in the bar as
before, and was secretly very glad to stay there. But she lost face with
other people, she couldn’t help noticing that, of course, she does
notice things, usually even before they’ve happened. A really beautiful, attractive girl, once she’s become used to working in the bar,
doesn’t have to employ any arts; as long as she’s beautiful she will be
a barmaid, unless something especially unfortunate happens. A girl
like Frieda, however, must always be anxious about her job; of course
she doesn’t show it in any obvious way, she’s more likely to complain
and curse the job. But in secret she keeps observing the atmosphere,
so she saw how people were getting indiﬀerent to her; it wasn’t worth
looking up when Frieda came in, even the servants didn’t bother
about her any more, they understandably stuck to Olga and girls

like that. And she noticed the behaviour of the landlord, and saw
that she was nowhere near so indispensable any more. She couldn’t
always be making up new stories about Klamm, there are limits to
everything—so dear Frieda thought up something new. Who would
have seen through it from the ﬁrst? Well, Pepi had guessed, but
unfortunately hadn’t seen right through it. Frieda decides on a scandal; she, Klamm’s lover, will throw herself at the ﬁrst man who
comes along, perhaps someone totally insigniﬁcant. That will attract
attention, people will talk about that for a long time, and at last, at
last they’ll remember what it means to be Klamm’s lover, what it
means to cast aside that honour in the frenzy of a new love. The only
diﬃcult part was ﬁnding a suitable man with whom she could play
this clever game. It couldn’t be anyone Frieda knew already, not even
one of the servants, he would probably have stared at her wide-eyed
and gone away, and above all he wouldn’t have taken it seriously.
However much he might talk, it would have been impossible to
spread the story that Frieda had been attacked by him, hadn’t been
able to defend herself, and in a crazy moment had fallen for him. And
if it was to be someone very insigniﬁcant, it had to be someone of
whom it could credibly be believed that in spite of his blunt, inelegant manners he longed only for Frieda, of all people, and had no
greater desire than—for heaven’s sake!—to marry her. But if it was
to be a low, vulgar man, if possible even lower, much lower than a
servant, it should be someone who wouldn’t have every other girl
mocking her, someone by whom another girl, capable of good judgement, might perhaps be attracted. But where would you ﬁnd a man
like that? Another girl might have sought him in vain for a lifetime,
but Frieda’s luck brings the land surveyor to her in the bar, perhaps
on the very evening when the idea ﬁrst comes into her mind. The
land surveyor! Yes, what was K. thinking of ? What strange ideas did
he have in his head? Did he want to achieve something in particular?
A good appointment, a distinction? Did he want something of that
kind? Well, then he should have gone about it diﬀerently from the
start. He is nothing, it is pitiful to see his position. He is a land surveyor, well, perhaps that is something, he has trained at something,
but if there’s nothing you can do with that training then it means
nothing. And he was making claims without anything at all to support them, not making them straight out, but you noticed that he was
making claims of some kind, and that was provocative. Does he know

that even a chambermaid is losing face if she talks to him for any
length of time? And with all these special claims, he falls into the
most obvious trap on the very ﬁrst evening. Isn’t he ashamed of himself ? What did he see in Frieda? He could admit it now. Could that
thin, sallow creature really have appealed to him? Oh no, he didn’t
even look at her, she just told him that she was Klamm’s lover, that
was interesting news to him, and he was lost. But now she had to
move out, now of course there was no job for her at the Castle Inn.
Pepi saw her the morning before she moved out, the staﬀ had gathered, everyone was curious to see the sight. And her power was still
so great that they were sorry for her, all of them, even her enemies
were sorry for her; so well did her calculations work out at ﬁrst. It
seemed unthinkable to everyone that she’d thrown herself away on a
man like that, what a blow of fate, the little kitchen-maids, who of
course admire any barmaid, were inconsolable. Even Pepi was
moved, not even she could entirely arm herself against pity, although
her attention was really elsewhere. She noticed how little sadness
Frieda actually showed. After all, it was fundamentally a terrible
misfortune that had befallen her, and she acted as if she were very
unhappy, but that game wasn’t enough to deceive Pepi. So what kept
her going? The joy of her new love, perhaps? That idea could be
dismissed. What was it, then? What gave her the strength to be as
coolly friendly as always, even to Pepi, who was already regarded as
her successor? At the time Pepi didn’t have the leisure to think about
it, she had too much to do with preparing to take up her new post.
She ought really to be beginning work within a few hours, and she
didn’t have a smart hairstyle yet, or an elegant dress, or ﬁne underwear, or a good pair of shoes. All those things had to be found within
a few hours, and if she couldn’t equip herself properly it would be
better not to accept the post at all, for she’d be sure to lose it again in
the ﬁrst half-hour. Well, she partly succeeded in her aims. She had a
special talent for hairdressing; once the landlady had even summoned her to do her, the landlady’s, hair, the fact is that she has a
very light hand, and can arrange her own wealth of hair just as she
likes. There was help at hand over the dress too. Her colleagues were
still friendly with her, for it was a kind of honour to them too if a girl
from their group was promoted to barmaid, and Pepi could have
gained them many advantages later once she had real power. One of
the girls had had a length of expensive dress material, it was her great

treasure, she had often got the others to admire it, probably dreamed
of using it for herself in some very ﬁne way one day, and now that
Pepi needed it she gave it up, it was so kind of her. And the two other
girls were happy to help her with the sewing, they couldn’t have
worked harder if they’d been making the dress for themselves. It was
actually very cheerful and pleasant work. They all sat on their beds,
one above the other, sewing and singing, and handed the ﬁnished
pieces and the trimmings up and down to each other. When Pepi
thinks of that, her heart is all the heavier to know that it was all in
vain, and she would return to her friends the chambermaids emptyhanded. What a misfortune, and brought about with such thoughtlessness, above all by K. How glad they had been about that dress at
the time. It seemed the guarantee of success, and when room was
found for yet another ribbon later the last doubts disappeared. And
isn’t the dress really lovely? It is creased and a little stained now, Pepi
didn’t have a spare dress, she’d had to wear this one day and night,
but you can still see how beautiful it is, not even those dreadful sisters of Barnabas could come up with a better one. And then you can
take it in or let it out again as you like, above and below, it may be
only a dress but it’s an advantage that it can be so easily altered, and
that was really her own idea. Sewing isn’t diﬃcult for her, Pepi isn’t
boasting of that, and anything will suit a healthy young girl. It was
much harder to get underwear and good boots, and here the trouble
really began. Once again her friends helped as well as they could, but
there wasn’t much they could do. They came up with only coarse,
mended underwear, and instead of ankle-boots with high heels she
had to wear slippers that you would rather hide than show. People
comforted Pepi by saying that Frieda wasn’t very well dressed herself, and sometimes she went around looking such a sloven that the
guests would rather be served by the lads from the cellar than the
barmaid. Those were the facts of the matter, but Frieda could get
away with it because she was in favour and highly regarded; if a lady
happens to go out looking dirty and carelessly dressed for once, she
is all the more enticing, but a beginner like Pepi? And anyway Frieda
couldn’t dress well, she had no taste at all; if someone has a sallow
skin, she can’t do much about that, but she doesn’t have to wear a
low-cut cream blouse against it, like Frieda, so that your eyes watered
from looking at all that yellow. And even if that hadn’t been so, she
was too mean to dress well; she kept everything she earned, no one

knew what for. She didn’t need money in the job, she made use of
lies and tricks instead, she set an example that Pepi couldn’t and
wouldn’t follow, and so it was right for her, Pepi, to prettify herself
so that she could make her mark at the very outset. If only she had
had more funds to do it with she’d have defeated Frieda in spite of
all her slyness and all K.’s folly. And it began so well. She had found
out the few skills you had to master and the things you had to know
in advance. As soon as she began work in the bar she was quite at
home there. No one missed Frieda. It was only on the second day
that some of the guests asked what had become of her. There were
no mistakes, the landlord was satisﬁed, he had been so anxious on the
ﬁrst day that he was in and out of the bar all the time, later he came
only now and then, and in the end, since the takings were right—in
fact the bar was taking on average a little more money than in
Frieda’s time—he left everything to Pepi. She introduced innovations. Frieda had supervised everyone strictly, not out of industry
but out of avarice, out of her desire to dominate and her fear of letting someone else have any of her rights, she supervised even the
servants, at least in part, especially when someone was watching.
Pepi, on the other hand, left that work entirely to the cellar lads, who
were much better suited to it. That meant she had more time for the
gentlemen’s rooms, the guests were served quickly, and she could
exchange a few words with someone, not like Frieda, who apparently
kept herself entirely for Klamm, and considered every word or
approach from someone else an insult to him. That was clever too, to
be sure, for if she ever did let someone approach her it was an
unheard-of favour. But Pepi hated such tricks, and you can’t use
them to start with in a job either. Pepi was friendly to everyone, and
everyone was friendly to her in return. They were all obviously glad
of the change; when those tired, overworked gentlemen can ﬁnally sit
over their beer for a while, you can positively transform them with a
word, a glance, a shrug of your shoulders. Everyone liked to run his
hands through Pepi’s curls, she probably had to tidy her hair ten
times a day; no one could resist the allure of those curls and the bows
in her hair, not even K., who usually noticed nothing much. So those
exciting, hard-working but successful days ﬂew by. If only they
hadn’t ﬂown so fast, if only there had been more of them left! Four
days are not enough, when you’re working yourself to the bone, perhaps the ﬁfth day would have done the trick, but four days were

too few. Pepi had indeed won friends and patrons in those four days,
if she could trust the glances of all eyes she had been positively swimming in a sea of goodwill as she walked around with the beer tankards. A clerk called Bratmeier is crazy about her, she says, he gave
her this chain and locket with his picture in the locket, which was
certainly very bold of him—this, that, and the other had happened,
but it was still only four days. In four days, if Pepi had put her mind
to it, Frieda could have been almost if not entirely forgotten, and she
would have been forgotten too, perhaps even earlier, if she hadn’t
made sure to keep people talking about her by creating such a scandal. It had made her interesting to them again, they wanted to see her
merely out of curiosity; what had become dreadfully dreary had fresh
interest because of K., to whom they were otherwise entirely indifferent, they wouldn’t have lost interest in Pepi because of that, not
while she was standing here physically present to them, but the gentlemen are mostly elderly and set in their ways, it takes them some
time to get used to a new barmaid, however much the change is for
the better, but it will take a few days, even if it’s against the gentlemen’s real will it’s going to take a few days, perhaps only ﬁve, but
four are not enough, Pepi still seemed like the temporary barmaid in
spite of everything. And then there was perhaps the greatest of misfortunes; in those four days Klamm, although he had been in the
village for the ﬁrst two of them, had not come down to the guestroom next door. If he had come, that would have been a crucial test
for Pepi, and a test she didn’t fear at all, indeed she was looking forward to it. She would not—to be sure, it is better not to put such
things into words—she would not have become Klamm’s lover, and
would never have told lies elevating herself to such a position, but
she would at least have been able to put the beer glass on the table
just as nicely as Frieda, she would have said a nice ‘Good-day’, without any of Frieda’s pushy manner, and she would have taken her
leave prettily too, and if Klamm was looking for anything at all in a
girl’s eyes, well, he’d have found it in Pepi’s to his full satisfaction.
But why didn’t he come? Was it pure chance? Pepi had thought so at
the time. She was expecting him at any moment during those ﬁrst
two days, she waited for him to appear at night too. Now Klamm will
arrive, she kept on thinking, pacing up and down for no reason other
than the agitation of waiting and the wish to be the ﬁrst to see him
come in. This constant disappointment tired her out, and perhaps

for that reason she didn’t achieve as much as she could have done.
When she had a little time she stole out into the corridor that the staﬀ
were strictly forbidden to enter, huddled in a niche there, and waited.
If only Klamm would come now, she thought, if only I could take
that gentleman out of his room myself and carry him down to the
guest-room in my arms. I wouldn’t collapse under the burden, however great it was. But he didn’t come. It’s so quiet in those corridors
upstairs, Pepi said, you can’t imagine how quiet if you haven’t been
there. It’s so quiet that you can’t stand it for long, the silence drives
you away. But again and again, driven away ten times, Pepi climbed
up there again ten times. There was no point in it. If Klamm wanted
to come down he would come, and if he didn’t want to come down
Pepi wouldn’t lure him out, even if she was half choked in the niche
by the palpitations of her heart. There was no point in it, but if he
didn’t come there was no point in almost anything. And he didn’t
come. Today Pepi knows why Klamm didn’t come. Frieda would
have been much amused if she had seen Pepi in the niche up in that
corridor, both hands to her heart. Klamm didn’t come down because
Frieda wouldn’t let him. It wasn’t her requests that had won the day,
her requests carried no weight with Klamm. But that spider in her
web has connections that nobody knows about. If Pepi says something to a guest she says it openly, they can hear her at the table next
to the guest’s too; Frieda has nothing to say, she just puts the beer
down on the table and walks away, with only her silk petticoat rustling, it’s the one thing she will pay good money for. And if she does
say something for once, she doesn’t say it openly, she whispers to the
guest, bending down, so that they have to prick up their ears at the
next table. Whatever she says is probably unimportant, but not
always, she has connections, keeps some of them going through the
others, and while most of them fail her—well, who would bother
about Frieda in the long run?—now and then one will hold ﬁrm. So
she began exploiting these connections, K. gave her the opportunity
for that, instead of staying with her and keeping watch on her he
hardly goes home at all, he wanders around, talks to this person and
that, watches out for everything except for Frieda, and ﬁnally, giving
her yet more freedom, he moves from the Bridge Inn to the empty
schoolhouse. That’s a ﬁne start to a honeymoon! Well, Pepi is certainly the last woman to blame K. for not being able to stand life with
Frieda—no one can stand life with Frieda. But why didn’t he leave

her entirely then, why did he keep going back to her, why did his
wandering about give the impression that he was championing her?
It looked as if only contact with Frieda had shown him how little he
really meant, as if he wanted to make himself worthy of Frieda, as if
he somehow wanted to work his way up and so, for the time being,
held back from living with her so that later, in his own good time, he
could make up for it. Meanwhile Frieda is not wasting time, she sits
in the school to which she has probably been instrumental in bringing K., keeping watch on the Castle Inn and K. too. She has excellent
messengers to hand, K.’s assistants, whom he leaves entirely to
her—it is hard to understand that, even if you know K. you really
can’t understand it. She sends them to her old friends, reminds them
of what has happened, complains that she is kept captive by a man
like K., stirs up bad feeling against Pepi, announces that she’ll be
back any day now, asks for help, tells her friends not to say a word to
Klamm, acts as if Klamm must be spared and so in no circumstances
can he be allowed down into the bar. While she pretends to some that
she is just being thoughtful for Klamm, she exploits her success with
the landlord by pointing out that Klamm is not coming down there
any more. How could he, when there’s only a girl like Pepi serving
in the bar? Of course the landlord isn’t to blame, says Frieda, Pepi
was just the best substitute he could ﬁnd, only she’s not good enough
even for a few days. K. knows nothing about all this intriguing on
Frieda’s part; if he isn’t out and about he’s lying at her feet, suspecting nothing, while she counts the hours that still lie between her and
her return to the bar. But the assistants don’t just act as messengers,
they also serve to make K. jealous, to keep him on the boil. Frieda
has known the assistants since her childhood, they certainly have no
secrets from each other, but for K.’s beneﬁt they start making eyes at
each other, and K. is in danger of assuming it’s a great love. And K.
does all he can to please Frieda, however contradictory it may be, he
lets the assistants make him jealous but he allows the three of them
to stay together while he goes oﬀ on long walks on his own. It’s
almost as if he were Frieda’s third assistant. So on the grounds of
what she’s observed, Frieda decides on her master-stroke—she
decides to come back, and it is high time too, it’s remarkable how
that cunning girl Frieda recognizes and exploits that fact, her power
of observation and decision is Frieda’s special skill. If Pepi had it,
how diﬀerent would her own life be. If Frieda had stayed at the

school just one or two days longer, Pepi couldn’t have been driven
away, she would have been the established barmaid at last, liked and
loved by one and all, she’d have earned enough money to complete
her wardrobe and ﬁt herself out brilliantly, another two or three days
and no tricks could have kept Klamm away from the bar, oh yes, he
comes in, he drinks, he feels comfortable, and if he notices Frieda’s
absence at all he is very happy about the change, another two or three
days and Frieda, with her scandalous behaviour, with her connections, with the assistants, with everything else, would be utterly
forgotten, she would never surface again. Then would she perhaps
cling all the more ﬁrmly to K., and at last learn to love him truly,
assuming that she is capable of such a thing? No, not that either. For
it wouldn’t take K. more than a day to tire of her, to realize how
shamefully she is deceiving him in every way, with her supposed
beauty, her supposed constancy, most of all with her supposed love
for Klamm, only one day is all he’d need to chase her and those ﬁlthy
assistants out of the house—you might think that not even K. would
need longer. And then, between those two dangers, where the ground
positively seems to be closing over Frieda, K. in his foolishness keeps
the last way of escape open for her, a narrow one, and she takes it.
Suddenly—hardly anyone expected it any more, it is unnatural—
suddenly it is she chasing away K., who still loves her, still follows her, and with the help of pressure from friends and assistants she
looks to the landlord like a saviour, more enticing than before because
of her scandalous behaviour, evidently desired by the lowest and the
highest alike, and she fell for the lowest only brieﬂy, soon rejected
him again as was only proper, and she is now out of his reach and
everyone else’s as in the old days, except that in the old days doubt,
quite correctly, was cast on all that, but now her status seems to be
conﬁrmed. So she comes back, the landlord glances surreptitiously at
Pepi and hesitates—is he to sacriﬁce her after she has proved her
worth so well?—but soon he’s been persuaded. There’s too much in
Frieda’s favour, and above all she will bring Klamm back to the
guest-room. And that’s what this evening is all about. Pepi isn’t
going to wait until Frieda comes back and makes taking over the job
again into a scene of triumph. She’s already handed the cash register
over to the landlady, she can go. Her bunk bed down in the maids’
room is ready for her, she will go there, to be greeted by her friends
in tears, will take the dress oﬀ her body and the ribbons out of her

hair and stuﬀ it all in a corner where it will be well hidden, and won’t
unnecessarily remind her of times that are better forgotten. Then she
will pick up the big bucket and the broom, grit her teeth, and set to
work. But for now she simply had to tell K. everything, so that he,
who wouldn’t have understood all this yet without any help, will just
for once see clearly how badly he has treated Pepi and how unhappy
he has made her. Although in fact he too has merely been misused.
Pepi had ﬁnished what she had to say. She mopped a few tears
from her eyes and cheeks and then looked at K., nodding, as if to say
it wasn’t really her own misfortune that troubled her, she would bear
it, and didn’t need help or consolation from anyone, least of all K.,
in spite of her youth she knew life, and her unhappiness just conﬁrmed what she knows, no, this was about K., she wanted to hold his
own picture up to him, even after the collapse of all her own hopes
she thought she ought to do that.
‘What a wild imagination you have, Pepi,’ said K. ‘Why, it’s not
true that you have discovered all these things only now; they’re nothing but dreams from the dark, cramped room you and the other
chambermaids share. They may be in place there, but they look
strange here in the open, in the bar. You couldn’t have held your
ground here with such notions, that’s obvious. Even your dress and
your hairstyle, on which you pride yourself so much, are just the
fantastic outcome of that darkness and those beds in your room. I am
sure they look very attractive there, but here everyone laughs at
them, whether secretly or openly. And what else do you say? You say
I have been misused and betrayed? No, dear Pepi, I haven’t been
misused and betrayed any more than you have. It is true that at
present Frieda has left me, or as you put it has run oﬀ with one of the
assistants, so you have hit upon some idea of the facts, and it is really
very unlikely that she will be my wife now, but it is entirely untrue
to say that I tired of her, or chased her away next day, or that she
betrayed me as a woman might usually betray a man. You chambermaids are used to spying through keyholes, which means that when
you really do see some small thing, it leads you to draw grand but
erroneous conclusions about the whole picture. The result is that I,
for instance, know much less than you claim to know. I cannot explain
in nearly as much detail as you do why Frieda has left me. It seems
to me that you have also touched on the most probable explanation,
although you didn’t make much of it: I neglected her. I am afraid

that’s true, I have indeed neglected her, but there were particular
reasons for that which it is not right to mention here. I would be
happy if she came back to me, but I would begin neglecting her again
at once, and that’s how it is. When she was with me, I was always out
and about on those wanderings you ridicule; now that she’s gone I
have almost nothing to do, I am tired, I long to be even more entirely
unoccupied. Have you no advice for me, Pepi?’ ‘Oh yes,’ said Pepi,
suddenly becoming lively and taking hold of K.’s shoulders. ‘We’ve
both been betrayed, let’s stay together, come down to the other
maids with me.’ ‘I can’t talk to you sensibly while you complain of
being betrayed,’ said K. ‘You keep saying you were betrayed because
the idea touches you and ﬂatters you. But the truth is that you are not
suitable for this position. If even I, who in your opinion know nothing, see that unsuitability then it must be very obvious. You are a
good girl, Pepi, but it isn’t easy to see that. I, for instance, thought
you cruel and arrogant at ﬁrst, which you aren’t, it is just this post
that bewilders you because you’re not suitable for it. I don’t mean to
say it is too elevated for you, it is nothing so very out of the ordinary,
or perhaps, looking at it closely, its status is a little higher than your
previous job, but on the whole there is no great diﬀerence, the two
are very similar, in fact one might almost say that to be a chambermaid is better than working in the bar, for the chambermaids are
always among the secretaries, while here, even if you may serve the
secretaries’ superiors in the guest-rooms, you must also meet very
common folk, for instance me; it is right and proper that I can’t go
anywhere else in the inn, only be here in the bar, and is the possibility of meeting me such a great distinction? Well, it seems so to you,
and perhaps you have your reasons. But that is just why you are
unsuitable. Although this is a job like any other, to you it seems like
heaven, and as a result you do everything with excessive enthusiasm,
you deck yourself out as you think the angels are adorned—although
they are really not at all like that—you tremble for your post, you
feel persecuted the whole time, you try to win over everyone who,
you think, might be able to support you, showing far too much
friendliness, but that is a nuisance to them and puts them oﬀ, for
they want peace when they come to the inn, not to add the barmaid’s
troubles to their own. It’s possible that after Frieda left none of the
distinguished guests really noticed, but today they do and they really
long to have Frieda back, I suppose because she ran everything very

diﬀerently. Whatever else she may be like, and however she valued
her post, she was experienced at serving the guests, cool and controlled, as you say yourself, but you don’t proﬁt by her example. Did you
ever notice the expression in her eyes? It was not the expression of a
barmaid but almost of a landlady. She saw everything, every detail,
and the way she looked at an individual was enough to subdue him.
What did it matter that she may have been a little thin, not as young
as she once was, that a girl can have thicker hair? Those are all small
details compared to what she really did have, and anyone troubled by
those ﬂaws would just have shown that he lacked a sense of better
things. No such accusation can be levelled against Klamm, and it is
only a young, inexperienced girl’s viewpoint that makes you believe
Klamm couldn’t have loved Frieda. Klamm seems to you—and
correctly—out of reach, and so you think that Frieda couldn’t have
been close to Klamm either. You are wrong. I would trust Frieda’s
word alone for that, even if I didn’t have incontrovertible evidence of
it. Incredible as it seems to you, and little as you can reconcile it with
your ideas of the world, and the life of the oﬃcials, of distinction and
the eﬀect of female beauty, it is true, as true as we’re sitting here
together and I take your hand between mine. No doubt that is how
Klamm and Frieda sat side by side too, as if it were the most natural
thing in the world, and he came down here of his own free will,
indeed he hurried down, no one was lying in wait for him in the corridor and neglecting the rest of her work, Klamm had to come down
of his own accord, and the deﬁciencies of Frieda’s clothing that have
horriﬁed you so much didn’t trouble him at all. You just don’t want
to believe her! And you don’t know how you are exposing yourself,
because it shows your inexperience. Even someone who knew nothing about her relationship with Klamm must notice that of its very
nature it left its mark on someone above you and me and all the other
people in the village, and that their conversations went beyond the
usual sort of joking between guests and waitresses, which seems to be
the whole aim of your life. But I am doing you an injustice. You
know Frieda’s advantages very well yourself, you notice her gift for
observation, her power of decision, her inﬂuence over other people,
only you interpret it all in the wrong way, you think that she uses all
that selﬁshly for her own beneﬁt and with bad intentions, or even as
a weapon against you. No, Pepi, even if she did hold such arrows in
her hand she couldn’t shoot them such a short way. And selﬁsh? One

might rather say that by sacriﬁcing what she had, and what she could
expect, she gave us both, you and me, an opportunity to rise higher,
but that we have disappointed her and have positively forced her to
come back here. I don’t know whether that is so, and I am not quite
clear how I am to blame, but when I compare myself with you something of the kind does appear before me; it is as if we both tried too
hard, too noisily, too childishly, and with too little experience to gain
something that can easily and quietly be had with, for instance,
Frieda’s calm and Frieda’s objectivity, but we tried to get it by weeping and scratching and tugging, just as a child tugs at the tablecloth
but cannot get it, merely sweeps all the beautiful things oﬀ the table
and puts them out of reach for ever—I don’t know if that is the case,
but I do know for certain that it is more likely than your version of
events.’ ‘I see,’ said Pepi. ‘You’re in love with Frieda because she ran
away from you. It’s not diﬃcult to be in love with her when she’s not
around. But even if it’s as you claim, and even if you are right about
everything, including making me look ridiculous—what are you
going to do now? Frieda has left you, neither my explanation nor
yours gives you any hope of her coming back to you, and even if she
did, you have to spend the time in between somewhere, it’s cold
weather and you have neither work nor a bed, so come to us, you’ll
like my friends, we’ll make you comfortable, you can help us with
our work, which really is too hard for girls on their own, we girls
won’t have to rely entirely on ourselves and feel afraid at night. Do
come and join us! My girlfriends know Frieda too, we’ll tell you
stories of her until you’re sick and tired of them. Do come! We have
pictures of Frieda as well, we’ll show you those. Frieda was even less
striking then than now, you’ll hardly recognize her, except from her
eyes, which had a sly look even then. Well, will you come?’ ‘Is that
allowed? Yesterday it was a great scandal when I was caught in your
corridor.’ ‘That’s because you were caught, but if you are with us
you won’t be caught. No one will know about you, only the three of
us. Oh, what fun it will be! My life there already seems to me more
bearable than it did a little while ago. Perhaps I’m not losing so very
much by having to leave the job here after all. You know, even with
the three of us we weren’t bored, you have to sweeten the bitterness
of life, it’s made bitter for us in our youth so that our tongues don’t
get used to luxury, but we three stick together, we live as nice a life
as possible, you’ll specially like Henriette, and Emilie too, I’ve already

told them about you, people listen to such tales and marvel, as if
nothing could happen outside our room, it’s warm if cramped in
there and we keep close together, even though we have only each
other to rely on we don’t get tired of one another. On the contrary,
when I think of my girlfriends I almost feel it’s all right to be going
back there. Why should I rise higher than them? That was what kept
us together, all three of us having the future barred to us in the same
way, and then I broke out and was separated from them, but the fact
is I didn’t forget them, and my next concern was how I could do
something for them; my own position was still uncertain—though I
didn’t know just how uncertain—and already I was talking to the
landlord about Henriette and Emilie. The landlord wasn’t entirely
inﬂexible in Henriette’s case, but as for Emilie, who is much older
than the two of us—she’s about Frieda’s age—he could give me no
hope there. But just think, they don’t want to leave, they know it’s a
wretched life they lead there, but they’ve adjusted to it, good souls,
I believe their tears when I said goodbye were mostly grief because I
had to leave the room we shared and go out into the cold—in our
room everything outside it seems to us cold—and I’d have to go
around in those great, strange rooms with those great, strange people
for no purpose but to earn a living, though I’d done that before when
we lived and worked together. They probably won’t be surprised to
see me coming back, and they’ll cry a little and bemoan my fate just
to oblige me. But then they’ll see you, and realize that it was a good
thing I left after all. It will make them happy to know that now we
have a man to help and protect us, and they’ll be positively delighted
that it all has to be kept secret, and the secret will bind us even more
closely together than before. Come and join us, oh do please come
and join us! There’s no obligation on you, you won’t be bound to the
room for ever as we are. When spring comes, if you ﬁnd somewhere
else to stay and you don’t like it with us any more, you can go, only
you’ll still have to keep the secret, and not give us away, because
that would be the end of us at the Castle Inn. And of course if you’re
with us you must be careful not to show yourself anywhere that we
don’t consider safe, and to follow our advice. That’s all the obligation
you have, and you will have to put up with it just as we do, but
otherwise you’re entirely free, the work we give you to do won’t be
too hard, don’t be afraid of that. Well, will you come?’ ‘How long is
it until spring?’ asked K. ‘Until spring?’ Pepi repeated. ‘Oh, winter

here is long, a very long, monotonous winter. But we don’t complain
of that down there, we’re safe there from the winter. Well, some time
spring will come, and summer too, and they have their own time, but
now, as we remember them, spring and summer seem as short as if
they weren’t much more than two days long, and even on those days
snow sometimes falls in the middle of the ﬁnest weather.’
The door opened. Pepi jumped—in her thoughts she had moved
too far from the bar—but it wasn’t Frieda, it was the landlady. She
seemed surprised to ﬁnd K. still here. K. excused himself by saying
that he had been waiting for her, and at the same time he thanked her
for letting him spend the night here. The landlady didn’t understand
why K. had been waiting for her. K. said he had had the impression
that the landlady wanted to speak to him, he asked her pardon if that
had been a mistake, and anyway he must go now, he had been away
from the school where he was janitor far too long, yesterday’s summons had been to blame for everything, he still had too little experience in these things, he said, he certainly wouldn’t make as much
trouble for the landlady again as he had yesterday. And he bowed,
ready to go. But the landlady stared at him with a look in her eyes as
if she were dreaming. That look of hers kept K. there longer than he
wanted. Then she smiled a little too, and only at K.’s expression of
amazement did she wake up to some extent. It was as if she had been
waiting for a response to her smile, but now, when none came, she
woke up. ‘You had the impudence to say something about my dress
yesterday.’ K. couldn’t remember that. ‘Don’t you remember?
You’re not only impudent but cowardly too, then.’ K. explained that
it was due to his weariness yesterday; it was possible, he said, that he
had talked about something or other, but he couldn’t remember it
now. What could he have been saying about the good landlady’s
dresses? That they were more beautiful than any dresses he had ever
seen? Or at least, he had never seen a landlady go about her work in
such dresses before. ‘Never mind passing personal remarks,’ said the
landlady quickly. ‘I don’t want to hear another word from you about
my dresses. My dresses are none of your business. I forbid you to
mention them, and that’s that.’ K. bowed again and went to the door.
‘What do you mean, anyway?’ called the landlady after him. ‘What
do you mean, you never saw a landlady go about her work in such
dresses before? Why say such pointless things? What could be
more pointless? What do you mean by it?’ K. turned back and asked

the landlady not to upset herself. Of course his remark was pointless,
he said. He really didn’t know anything about dresses. In his situation, any clean dress that didn’t need mending seemed to him very
ﬁne. He had just been surprised, he said, to see the landlady there in
the corridor at night in such a beautiful evening dress among all
those half-clothed men, that was all. ‘Well,’ said the landlady, ‘at last
you seem to remember what you said yesterday! And you compound
your impertinence with yet more nonsense. It is true that you know
nothing about dresses. So let me earnestly beg you, kindly desist from
passing remarks on ﬁne dresses and what they are like, or about unsuitable evening dresses, or anything of the kind. And anyway’—here a
shudder seemed to pass through her—‘you are not to pay any attention to my dresses, do you hear?’ And when K. was about to turn
away again, in silence, she asked: ‘Where did you get your knowledge
of dresses, then?’ K. shrugged his shoulders to show that he didn’t
know. ‘Well, you have none,’ said the landlady, ‘so don’t make out
that you do. Come over to the oﬃce and I’ll show you something,
and then I hope you will leave oﬀ your impudence for ever.’ She
went ahead through the door; Pepi ran to K. On the excuse that she
wanted K. to pay what he owed, they quickly came to an agreement;
it was very easy, since K. knew the yard with the gate leading into the
side-street. There was a little gate beside the big one, and Pepi would
be waiting on the other side of that in an hour’s time and open it
when he knocked three times.
The private oﬃce of the inn was opposite the bar, there was only
the front hall to cross. The landlady was already standing in the
lighted oﬃce, looking impatiently at K. But there was one distraction. Gerstäcker had been waiting in the hall and wanted to speak to
K. It wasn’t easy to shake him oﬀ. The landlady joined in too, pointing out to Gerstäcker that he was intruding. ‘Where do I wait, then?
Where do I wait?’ Gerstäcker could be heard calling as the door was
closed, and his words were mingled unappealingly with sighing and
coughing.
The oﬃce was a small, overheated room. A lectern desk stood by
one of the shorter walls, and an iron safe too, while a wardrobe and
an ottoman stood by the longer walls. The wardrobe took up most of
the space; not only did it extend along the whole of one long wall, but
its depth made the room very cramped, and three sliding doors
were necessary to open it completely. The landlady pointed to the

ottoman, indicating that K. should sit down on it, and she herself sat
on the swivelling chair by the lectern. ‘Haven’t you ever trained as a
tailor and dressmaker?’ asked the landlady. ‘No, never,’ said K.
‘What’s your profession, then?’ ‘I’m a land surveyor.’ ‘What’s that?’
K. told her, but the explanation made her yawn. ‘You’re not telling
the truth. Why don’t you tell the truth?’ ‘You’re not telling the truth
either.’ ‘I? There you go again with your impudence. And suppose I
wasn’t telling it—do I have to justify myself to you? Anyway, in what
way am I not telling the truth?’ ‘You are not just a landlady, as you
make out.’ ‘Well, you’re very sharp, I’m sure. What else am I, then?
Your impertinence is really too much!’ ‘I don’t know what else you
are. I see only that you appear to be a landlady, but you wear dresses
that don’t suit a landlady, and as far as I know no one here in the
village wears anything like them.’ ‘Ah, so now we’re coming to it.
You can’t deny it. Perhaps you aren’t impudent at all, perhaps you’re
just like a child who knows some silly joke and can’t be brought to
keep it quiet. So out with it. What’s so special about those dresses?’
‘You’ll be angry if I tell you.’ ‘No, I shall laugh, because it will be just
childish nonsense. So what are my dresses like?’ ‘Well, you did ask.
They are made of good fabric, expensive dress material, but they are
old-fashioned, over-trimmed, often too elaborately made, they are
wearing out, and they suit neither your years nor your ﬁgure nor
your position. I noticed them as soon as I ﬁrst set eyes on you, about
a week ago in the front hall here.’ ‘So now we have it. They are oldfashioned, over-trimmed, and what else was it? And how do you
think you know all that?’ ‘I can see it. One doesn’t need any training
to know such a thing.’ ‘You can see it, just like that. You don’t have
to go and ask anywhere, you know at once what fashion demands.
You’re going to be invaluable to me, because I do have a weakness for
beautiful dresses. And what will you say when I tell you that this
wardrobe is full of them?’ She pushed the sliding doors aside, and
dress upon dress was to be seen hanging close together the whole
breadth and depth of the wardrobe, most of them dark, grey, brown,
black dresses, all carefully hung up with their skirts spread. ‘Those
are my dresses, all of them old-fashioned and over-trimmed in your
opinion. But these are only the dresses I don’t have room for in my
bedroom. I have two more wardrobes full of them upstairs, two
wardrobes, each almost the size of this one. Are you amazed?’ ‘No,
I expected something of the kind. As I said, you’re more than just a

landlady, you are aiming for something else.’ ‘I’m aiming only to
dress well, and you are either a fool or a child or a very bad, dangerous man. So go away, hurry up, go away!’ K. was out in the hall, and
Gerstäcker was holding his sleeve again, as the landlady called after
him: ‘I’m having a new dress delivered tomorrow. Perhaps I’ll let
you go and fetch it.’
Gerstäcker, angrily waving his hand as if to silence the landlady
from a distance, because she bothered him, asked K. to go with him.
At ﬁrst he wouldn’t explain why, and he didn’t take much notice of
K.’s objection that he ought to go to the school now. Only when K.
resisted being dragged oﬀ by him did Gerstäcker tell him not to
worry, he would have everything he needed at his own place, he
could give up the post of school janitor, and would he please now
come? He’d been waiting for him all day, Gerstäcker told him, his
mother didn’t know where he was. Slowly yielding to his demands,
K. asked how he planned to provide board and lodging for him.
Gerstäcker just answered brieﬂy, saying he needed K. to help with
the horses, he himself had other business now, and he wished K.
didn’t have to be dragged along like this, making unnecessary diﬃculties for him. If K. wanted payment then he, Gerstäcker, would
give him payment. But for all his tugging K. stopped dead now. He
didn’t know anything about horses, he said. That didn’t matter, said
Gerstäcker impatiently, and in his irate state of mind he actually
clasped his hands pleadingly to persuade K. to go with him. ‘I don’t
know why you want me to come with you,’ K. said at last. It was all
one to Gerstäcker what K. knew. ‘Is it because you think that I can
bring inﬂuence to bear on Erlanger for you?’ ‘That’s right,’ said
Gerstäcker. ‘Why else would I be interested in you?’ K. laughed,
took Gerstäcker’s arm, and let the man lead him away through the
darkness.
The living-room in Gerstäcker’s house was only dimly lit by the
ﬁre on the hearth and a candle-end. By the light of the latter someone
could be seen stooped in a niche under the sloping rafters that stuck
out there, reading a book. It was Gerstäcker’s mother. She gave K.
her trembling hand and made him sit down beside her. She spoke
with diﬃculty, it was hard to understand her, but what she said

*** END OF THE EBOOK ***
